---
layout: default
title: 10장 Objects and Classes
parent: Basic
grand_parent: Python
nav_order: 10
---

# {{ page.title }}
{: .no_toc }

## Table of contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta }

1. TOC
{:toc}

---

As I’ve mentioned on various pages, everything in Python, from numbers to functions, is an object. However, Python hides most of the object machinery by means of special syntax. You can type num = 7 to create an object of type integer with the value 7, and assign an object reference to the name num. The only time you need to look inside objects is when you want to make your own or modify the behavior of existing objects. You’ll see how to do both in this chapter.

## What Are Objects?

An object is a custom data structure containing both data (variables, called attributes) and code (functions, called methods). It represents a unique instance of some concrete thing. Think of objects as nouns and their methods as verbs. An object represents an individual thing, and its methods define how it interacts with other things.

For example, the integer object with the value 7 is an object that facilitates methods such as addition and multiplication, as you saw in Chapter 3. 8 is a different object.

This means there’s an integer class built in somewhere in Python, to which both 7 and 8 belong. The strings 'cat' and 'duck' are also objects in Python, and have string methods that you’ve seen in Chapter 5, such as capitalize() and replace().

Unlike modules, you can have multiple objects (often referred to as instances) at the same time, each with potentially different attributes. They’re like super data structures, with code thrown in.


## Simple Objects

Let’s start with basic object classes; we’ll save the discussion of inheritance for a few pages.

### Define a Class with class

To create a new object that no one has ever created before, you first define a class that indicates what it contains.

In Chapter 2, I compared an object to a plastic box. A class is like the mold that makes that box. For instance, Python has a built-in class that makes string objects such as 'cat' and 'duck', and the other standard data types—lists, dictionaries, and so on.

To create your own custom object in Python, you first need to define a class by using the class keyword. Let’s walk through some simple examples.

Suppose that you want to define objects to represent information about cats. Each object will represent one feline. You’ll first want to define a class called Cat as the mold. In the examples that follow, we try more than one version of this class as we build up from the simplest class to ones that actually do something useful.

```
We’re following the naming conventions of [Python’s PEP-8](https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/#class-names).
```
Our first try is the simplest possible class, an empty one:

```
>>> class Cat ():
... pass
```
You can also say:

```
>>> class Cat :
... pass
```
Just as with functions, we needed to say pass to indicate that this class was empty.

This definition is the bare minimum to create an object.

You create an object from a class by calling the class name as though it were a function:

```
>>> a_cat = Cat()
>>> another_cat = Cat()
```

In this case, calling Cat() creates two individual objects from the Cat class, and we assigned them to the names a_cat and another_cat. But our Cat class had no other code, so the objects that we created from it just sit there and can’t do much else.

Well, they can do a little.

### Attributes

An attribute is a variable inside a class or object. During and after an object or class is created, you can assign attributes to it. An attribute can be any other object. Let’s make two cat objects again:

```
>>> class Cat :
... pass
...
>>> a_cat = Cat()
>>> a_cat
<__main__.Cat object at 0x100cd1da0>
>>> another_cat = Cat()
>>> another_cat
<__main__.Cat object at 0x100cd1e48>
```
When we defined the Cat class, we didn’t specify how to print an object from that class. Python jumps in and prints something like <`__main__`.Cat object at 0x100cd1da0>. In “Magic Methods” on page 190, you’ll see how to change this default behavior.

Now assign a few attributes to our first object:

```
>>> a_cat.age = 3
>>> a_cat.name = "Mr. Fuzzybuttons"
>>> a_cat.nemesis = another_cat
```
Can we access these? We sure hope so:

```
>>> a_cat.age
3
>>> a_cat.name
'Mr. Fuzzybuttons'
>>> a_cat.nemesis
<__main__.Cat object at 0x100cd1e48>
```
Because nemesis was an attribute referring to another Cat object, we can use a_cat.nemesis to access it, but this other object doesn’t have a name attribute yet:

```
>>> a_cat.nemesis.name
Traceback (most recent call last):
File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
AttributeError: 'Cat' object has no attribute 'name'
```

```
2 You’ll see many examples of double underscores in Python names; to save syllables, some people pronounce
them as dunder.
```
Let’s name our archfeline:

```
>>> a_cat.nemesis.name = "Mr. Bigglesworth"
>>> a_cat.nemesis.name
'Mr. Bigglesworth'
```
Even the simplest object like this one can be used to store multiple attributes. So, you can use multiple objects to store different values, instead of using something like a list or dictionary.

When you hear attributes, it usually means object attributes. There are also class attributes, and you’ll see the differences later in “Class and Object Attributes” on page 185.

### Methods

A method is a function in a class or object. A method looks like any other function, but can be used in special ways that you’ll see in “Properties for Attribute Access” on page 182 and “Method Types” on page 186.

### Initialization

If you want to assign object attributes at creation time, you need the special Python object initialization method `__init__()`:

```
>>> class Cat :
... def __init__(self):
... pass
```
This is what you’ll see in real Python class definitions. I admit that the `__init__()` and self look strange. `__init__()` is the special Python name for a method that initializes an individual object from its class definition.^2 The self argument specifies that it refers to the individual object itself.

When you define `__init__()` in a class definition, its first parameter should be named self. Although self is not a reserved word in Python, it’s common usage. No one reading your code later (including you!) will need to guess what you meant if you use self.

But even this second Cat class definition didn’t create an object that really did anything. The third try is the charm that really shows how to create a simple object in Python and assign one of its attributes. This time, we add the parameter name to the initialization method:


```
>>> class Cat ():
... def __init__(self, name):
... self.name = name
...
>>>
```
Now we can create an object from the Cat class by passing a string for the name parameter:

```
>>> furball = Cat('Grumpy')
```
Here’s what this line of code does:

- Looks up the definition of the Cat class
- Instantiates (creates) a new object in memory
- Calls the object’s `__init__()` method, passing this newly created object as self and the other argument ('Grumpy') as name
- Stores the value of name in the object
- Returns the new object
- Attaches the variable furball to the object

This new object is like any other object in Python. You can use it as an element of a list, tuple, dictionary, or set. You can pass it to a function as an argument, or return it as a result.

What about the name value that we passed in? It was saved with the object as an attribute. You can read and write it directly:

```
>>> print ('Our latest addition: ', furball.name)
Our latest addition: Grumpy
```
Remember, inside the Cat class definition, you access the name attribute as self.name.

When you create an actual object and assign it to a variable like furball, you refer to it as furball.name.

It is not necessary to have an `__init__()` method in every class definition; it’s used to do anything that’s needed to distinguish this object from others created from the same class. It’s not what some other languages would call a “constructor.” Python already constructed the object for you. Think of `__init__()` as an initializer.

```
You can make many individual objects from a single class. But remember that Python implements data as objects, so the class itself is an object. However, there’s only one class object in your program. If you defined class Cat as we did here, it’s like the Highlander—there can be only one.
```

```
3 An inexpensive but not-so-good car from the ’80s.
```
## Inheritance

When you’re trying to solve some coding problem, often you’ll find an existing class that creates objects that do almost what you need. What can you do?

You could modify this old class, but you’ll make it more complicated, and you might break something that used to work.

Or you could write a new class, cutting and pasting from the old one and merging your new code. But this means that you have more code to maintain, and the parts of the old and new classes that used to work the same might drift apart because they’re now in separate places.

One solution is inheritance: creating a new class from an existing class, but with some additions or changes. It’s a good way to reuse code. When you use inheritance, the new class can automatically use all the code from the old class but without you needing to copy any of it.

### Inherit from a Parent Class

You define only what you need to add or change in the new class, and this overrides the behavior of the old class. The original class is called a parent, superclass, or base class; the new class is called a child, subclass, or derived class. These terms are interchangeable in object-oriented programming.

So, let’s inherit something. In the next example, we define an empty class called Car.

Next, we define a subclass of Car called Yugo.^3 You define a subclass by using the same class keyword but with the parent class name inside the parentheses (class Yugo(Car) here):

```
>>> class Car ():
... pass
...
>>> class Yugo (Car):
... pass
...
```
You can check whether a class is derived from another class by using issubclass():

```
>>> issubclass(Yugo, Car)
True
```
Next, create an object from each class:

```
>>> give_me_a_car = Car()
>>> give_me_a_yugo = Yugo()
```

A child class is a specialization of a parent class; in object-oriented lingo, Yugo is-a Car. The object named give_me_a_yugo is an instance of class Yugo, but it also inherits whatever a Car can do. In this case, Car and Yugo are as useful as deckhands on a submarine, so let’s try new class definitions that actually do something:

```
>>> class Car ():
... def exclaim(self):
... print ("I'm a Car!")
```
```
>>> class Yugo (Car):
... pass
```
Finally, make one object from each class and call the exclaim method:

```
>>> give_me_a_car = Car()
>>> give_me_a_yugo = Yugo()
>>> give_me_a_car.exclaim()
I'm a Car!
>>> give_me_a_yugo.exclaim()
I'm a Car!
```
Without doing anything special, Yugo inherited the exclaim() method from Car. In fact, Yugo says that it is a Car, which might lead to an identity crisis. Let’s see what we can do about that.

```
Inheritance is appealing, but can be overused. Years of objectoriented programming experience have shown that too much use of inheritance can make programs hard to manage. Instead, it’s often recommended to emphasize other techniques like aggregation and composition. We get to these alternatives in this chapter.
```
### Override a Method

As you just saw, a new class initially inherits everything from its parent class. Moving forward, you’ll see how to replace or override a parent method. Yugo should probably be different from Car in some way; otherwise, what’s the point of defining a new class? Let’s change how the exclaim() method works for a Yugo:

```
>>> class Car ():
... def exclaim(self):
... print ("I'm a Car!")
...
>>> class Yugo (Car):
... def exclaim(self):
... print ("I'm a Yugo! Much like a Car, but more Yugo-ish.")
...
```

Now make two objects from these classes:

```
>>> give_me_a_car = Car()
>>> give_me_a_yugo = Yugo()
```
What do they say?

```
>>> give_me_a_car.exclaim()
I'm a Car!
>>> give_me_a_yugo.exclaim()
I'm a Yugo! Much like a Car, but more Yugo-ish.
```
In these examples, we overrode the exclaim() method. We can override any methods, including `__init__()`. Here’s another example that uses a Person class. Let’s make subclasses that represent doctors (MDPerson) and lawyers (JDPerson):

```
>>> class Person ():
... def __init__(self, name):
... self.name = name
```
```
>>> class MDPerson (Person):
... def __init__(self, name):
... self.name = "Doctor " + name
```
```
>>> class JDPerson (Person):
... def __init__(self, name):
... self.name = name + ", Esquire"
```
In these cases, the initialization method `__init__()` takes the same arguments as the parent Person class but stores the value of name differently inside the object instance:

```
>>> person = Person('Fudd')
>>> doctor = MDPerson('Fudd')
>>> lawyer = JDPerson('Fudd')
>>> print (person.name)
Fudd
>>> print (doctor.name)
Doctor Fudd
>>> print (lawyer.name)
Fudd, Esquire
```
### Add a Method

The child class can also add a method that was not present in its parent class. Going back to classes Car and Yugo, we’ll define the new method need_a_push() for class Yugo only:

```
>>> class Car ():
... def exclaim(self):
... print ("I'm a Car!")
...
>>> class Yugo (Car):
```

```
... def exclaim(self):
... print ("I'm a Yugo! Much like a Car, but more Yugo-ish.")
... def need_a_push(self):
... print ("A little help here?")
```
Next, make a Car and a Yugo:

```
>>> give_me_a_car = Car()
>>> give_me_a_yugo = Yugo()
```
A Yugo object can react to a need_a_push() method call:

```
>>> give_me_a_yugo.need_a_push()
A little help here?
```
But a generic Car object cannot:

```
>>> give_me_a_car.need_a_push()
Traceback (most recent call last):
File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
AttributeError: 'Car' object has no attribute 'need_a_push'
```
At this point, a Yugo can do something that a Car cannot, and the distinct personality of a Yugo can emerge.

### Get Help from Your Parent with super()

We saw how the child class could add or override a method from the parent. What if it wanted to call that parent method? “I’m glad you asked,” says super(). Here, we define a new class called EmailPerson that represents a Person with an email address.

First, our familiar Person definition:

```
>>> class Person ():
... def __init__(self, name):
... self.name = name
...
```
Notice that the `__init__()` call in the following subclass has an additional email parameter:

```
>>> class EmailPerson (Person):
... def __init__(self, name, email):
... super().__init__(name)
... self.email = email
```
When you define an `__init__()` method for your class, you’re replacing the `__init__()` method of its parent class, and the latter is not called automatically anymore. As a result, we need to call it explicitly. Here’s what’s happening:

- The super() gets the definition of the parent class, Person.


- The `__init__()` method calls the Person.`__init__()` method. It takes care of passing the self argument to the superclass, so you just need to give it any optional arguments. In our case, the only other argument Person() accepts is
    name.
- The self.email = email line is the new code that makes this EmailPerson different from a Person.

Moving on, let’s make one of these creatures:

```
>>> bob = EmailPerson('Bob Frapples', 'bob@frapples.com')
```
We should be able to access both the name and email attributes:

```
>>> bob.name
'Bob Frapples'
>>> bob.email
'bob@frapples.com'
```
Why didn’t we just define our new class as follows?

```
>>> class EmailPerson (Person):
... def __init__(self, name, email):
... self.name = name
... self.email = email
```
We could have done that, but it would have defeated our use of inheritance. We used super() to make Person do its work, the same as a plain Person object would. There’s another benefit: if the definition of Person changes in the future, using super() will ensure that the attributes and methods that EmailPerson inherits from Person will reflect the change.

Use super() when the child is doing something its own way but still needs something from the parent (as in real life).

### Multiple Inheritance

You’ve just seen some class examples with no parent class, and some with one.

Actually, objects can inherit from multiple parent classes.

If your class refers to a method or attribute that it doesn’t have, Python will look in all the parents. What if more than one of them has something with that name? Who wins?

Unlike inheritance in people, where a dominant gene wins no matter who it came from, inheritance in Python depends on method resolution order. Each Python class has a special method called mro() that returns a list of the classes that would be visited to find a method or attribute for an object of that class. A similar attribute, called `__mro__`, is a tuple of those classes. Like a sudden-death playoff, the first one wins.


```
4 A mule has a father donkey and mother horse; a hinny has a father horse and mother donkey.
```
Here, we define a top Animal class, two child classes (Horse and Donkey), and then two derived from these:

```
>>> class Animal :
... def says(self):
return 'I speak!'
...
>>> class Horse (Animal):
... def says(self):
... return 'Neigh!'
...
>>> class Donkey (Animal):
... def says(self):
... return 'Hee-haw!'
...
>>> class Mule (Donkey, Horse):
... pass
...
>>> class Hinny (Horse, Donkey):
... pass
...
```
If we look for a method or attribute of a Mule, Python will look at the following things, in this order:

1. The object itself (of type Mule)
2. The object’s class (Mule)
3. The class’s first parent class (Donkey)
4. The class’s second parent class (Horse)
5. The grandparent class (Animal) class

It’s much the same for a Hinny, but with Horse before Donkey:

```
>>> Mule.mro()
[<class '__main__.Mule'>, <class '__main__.Donkey'>,
<class '__main__.Horse'>, <class '__main__.Animal'>,
<class 'object'>]
>>> Hinny.mro()
[<class '__main__.Hinny'>, <class '__main__.Horse'>,
<class '__main__.Donkey'>, <class '__main__.Animal'>,
class 'object'>]
```
So what do these fine beasts say?

```
>>> mule = Mule()
>>> hinny = Hinny()
```

```
>>> mule.says()
'hee-haw'
>>> hinny.says()
'neigh'
```
We listed the parent classes in (father, mother) order, so they talk like their dads.

If the Horse and Donkey did not have a says() method, the mule or hinny would have used the grandparent Animal class’s says() method, and returned 'I speak!'.

### Mixins

You may include an `extra parent class` in your class definition, but as a helper only.

That is, it doesn’t share any methods with the other parent classes, and avoids the method resolution ambiguity that I mentioned in the previous section.

Such a parent class is sometimes called a `mixin class`. Uses might include “side” tasks like logging. Here’s a mixin that pretty-prints an object’s attributes:

```
>>> class PrettyMixin ():
... def dump(self):
... import pprint
... pprint.pprint(vars(self))
```
```
>>> class Thing (PrettyMixin):
... pass
```
```
>>> t = Thing()
>>> t.name = "Nyarlathotep"
>>> t.feature = "ichor"
>>> t.age = "eldritch"
>>> t.dump()
{'age': 'eldritch', 'feature': 'ichor', 'name': 'Nyarlathotep'}
```
## In self Defense

One criticism of Python (besides the use of whitespace) is the need to include self as the first argument to instance methods (the kind of method you’ve seen in the previous examples). Python uses the self argument to find the right object’s attributes and methods. For an example, I’ll show how you would call an object’s method, and what Python actually does behind the scenes.

Remember class Car from earlier examples? Let’s call its exclaim() method again:

```
>>> a_car = Car()
>>> a_car.exclaim()
I'm a Car!
```
Here’s what Python actually does, under the hood:


- Look up the class (Car) of the object a_car
- Pass the object a_car to the exclaim() method of the Car class as the self parameter

Just for fun, you can even run it this way yourself and it will work the same as the normal (a_car.exclaim()) syntax:

```
>>> Car.exclaim(a_car)
I'm a Car!
```
However, there’s never a reason to use that lengthier style.

## Attribute Access

In Python, object attributes and methods are normally public, and you’re expected to behave yourself (this is sometimes called a “consenting adults” policy). Let’s compare the direct approach with some alternatives.

### Direct Access

As you’ve seen, you can get and set attribute values directly:

```
>>> class Duck :
... def __init__(self, input_name):
... self.name = input_name
```
```
>>> fowl = Duck('Daffy')
>>> fowl.name
'Daffy'
```
But what if someone misbehaves?

```
>>> fowl.name = 'Daphne'
>>> fowl.name
'Daphne'
```
The next two sections show ways to get some privacy for attributes that you don’t want anyone to stomp by accident.

### Getters and Setters

<!-- Some object-oriented languages support private object attributes that can’t be accessed directly from the outside. Programmers then may need to write getter and setter methods to read and write the values of such private attributes.

Python doesn’t have private attributes, but you can write getters and setters with obfuscated attribute names to get a little privacy. (The best solution is to use properties, described in the next section.) -->
private 유지 방법
- getter/setter사용
- property 사용(권장)
- Name Mangling for Privacy

In the following example, we define a Duck class with a single instance attribute called hidden_name. We don’t want people to access this directly, so we define two methods:

a `getter` (get_name()) and a `setter` (set_name()). Each is accessed by a property called name. I’ve added a print() statement to each method to show when it’s being called:

```python
>>> class Duck ():
...     def __init__(self, input_name):
...         self.hidden_name = input_name
...     def get_name(self):
...         print ('inside the getter')
...         return self.hidden_name
...     def set_name(self, input_name):
...         print ('inside the setter')
...         self.hidden_name = input_name
```
```python
>>> don = Duck('Donald')
>>> don.get_name()
inside the getter
'Donald'
>>> don.set_name('Donna')
inside the setter
>>> don.get_name()
inside the getter
'Donna'
```
### Properties for Attribute Access

The Pythonic solution for attribute privacy is to use properties.

There are two ways to do this. The first way is to add `name = property(get_name, set_name)` as the final line of our previous Duck class definition:

```python
>>> class Duck ():
>>>     def __init__(self, input_name):
>>>         self.hidden_name = input_name
>>>     def get_name(self):
>>>         print ('inside the getter')
>>>         return self.hidden_name
>>>     def set_name(self, input_name):
>>>         print ('inside the setter')
>>>         self.hidden_name = input_name
>>>     name = property(get_name, set_name)
```
The old getter and setter still work:

```python
>>> don = Duck('Donald')
>>> don.get_name()
inside the getter
'Donald'
>>> don.set_name('Donna')
inside the setter
>>> don.get_name()
inside the getter
'Donna'
```
But now you can also use the property name to get and set the hidden name:

```python
>>> don = Duck('Donald')
>>> don.name
inside the getter
'Donald'
>>> don.name = 'Donna'
inside the setter
>>> don.name
inside the getter
'Donna'
```
In the second method, you add some decorators and replace the method names get_name and set_name with name:

- `@property`, which goes before the getter method
- `@ _name_ .setter`, which goes before the setter method

Here’s how they actually look in the code:

```python
>>> class Duck ():
...     def __init__(self, input_name):
...         self.hidden_name = input_name
...     @property
...     def name(self):
...         print ('inside the getter')
...         return self.hidden_name
...     @name.setter
...     def name(self, input_name):
...         print ('inside the setter')
...         self.hidden_name = input_name
```
You can still access name as though it were an attribute:

```python
>>> fowl = Duck('Howard')
>>> fowl.name
inside the getter
'Howard'
>>> fowl.name = 'Donald'
inside the setter
>>> fowl.name
inside the getter
'Donald'
```
```
If anyone guessed that we called our attribute hidden_name, they could still read and write it directly as `fowl.hidden_name`. In “Name Mangling for Privacy” on page 184 , you’ll see how Python provides a special way to hide attribute names.
```

### Properties for Computed Values

In the previous examples, we used the name property to refer to a single attribute (hidden_name) stored within the object.

A property can also return a computed value. Let’s define a Circle class that has a radius attribute and a computed diameter property:

```python
>>> class Circle ():
...     def __init__(self, radius):
...         self.radius = radius
...     @property
...     def diameter(self):
...         return 2 * self.radius
```
Create a Circle object with an initial value for its radius:

```python
>>> c = Circle(5)
>>> c.radius
5
```
We can refer to diameter as if it were an attribute such as radius:

```python
>>> c.diameter
10
```
Here’s the fun part: we can change the radius attribute at any time, and the diameter property will be computed from the current value of radius:

```python
>>> c.radius = 7
>>> c.diameter
14
```
If you don’t specify a setter property for an attribute, you can’t set it from the outside.

This is handy for read-only attributes:

```python
>>> c.diameter = 20
Traceback (most recent call last):
File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
AttributeError: can't set attribute
```
There’s one more advantage of using a property over direct attribute access: if you ever change the definition of the attribute, you need to fix only the code within the class definition, not in all the callers.

### Name Mangling for Privacy

In the Duck class example a little earlier, we called our (not completely) hidden attribute hidden_name. Python has a `naming convention` for attributes that should not be visible outside of their class definition: begin with two underscores (`__`).


Let’s rename hidden_name to __name, as demonstrated here:

```python
>>> class Duck ():
...     def __init__(self, input_name):
...         self.__name = input_name
...     @property
...     def name(self):
...         print ('inside the getter')
...         return self.__name
...     @name.setter
...     def name(self, input_name):
...         print ('inside the setter')
...         self.__name = input_name
```
Take a moment to see whether everything still works:

```python
>>> fowl = Duck('Howard')
>>> fowl.name
inside the getter
'Howard'
>>> fowl.name = 'Donald'
inside the setter
>>> fowl.name
inside the getter
'Donald'
```
Looks good. And you can’t access the `__name` attribute:

```python
>>> fowl.__name
Traceback (most recent call last):
File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
AttributeError: 'Duck' object has no attribute '__name'
```
This naming convention doesn’t make it completely private, but Python does mangle the attribute name to make it unlikely for external code to stumble upon it. If you’re curious and promise not to tell everyone,^5 here’s what it becomes:

{: .note}
> \>>> fowl._Duck__name    
> 'Donald'

Notice that it didn’t print inside the getter. Although this isn’t perfect protection, name mangling discourages accidental or intentional direct access to the attribute.

### **Class Attributes** and **Object Attributes**

You can assign attributes to classes, and they’ll be inherited by their child objects:

```python
>>> class Fruit :
... color = 'red'
```

```python
>>> blueberry = Fruit()
>>> Fruit.color
'red'
>>> blueberry.color
'red'
```
But if you change the value of the attribute in the child object, it doesn’t affect the class attribute:

```python
>>> blueberry.color = 'blue'
>>> blueberry.color
'blue'
>>> Fruit.color
'red'
```
If you change the class attribute later, it won’t affect existing child objects:

```python
>>> Fruit.color = 'orange'
>>> Fruit.color
'orange'
>>> blueberry.color
'blue'
```
But it will affect new ones:

```python
>>> new_fruit = Fruit()
>>> new_fruit.color
'orange'
```
## Method Types

<!-- Some methods are part of the class itself, some are part of the objects that are created from that class, and some are none of the above:

- If there’s no preceding decorator, it’s an instance method, and its first argument should be self to refer to the individual object itself.
- If there’s a preceding @classmethod decorator, it’s a class method, and its first argument should be cls (or anything, just not the reserved word class), referring to the class itself.
- If there’s a preceding @staticmethod decorator, it’s a static method, and its first argument isn’t an object or class.

The following sections have some details. -->

- 메서드 앞에 **데커레이터가 없다면** 이것은 `인스턴스 메서드`이다. 첫 번째 인수는 객체 자신을 참조하는 `self`이다.
- 메서드 앞에 **@classmethod** 데커레이터가 있다면 `클래스 메서드`이다. 첫 번째 인수는 `cls`이다. 클래스 자체를 참조한다.
- 메서드 앞에 **@staticmethod** 데커레이터가 있다면 `정적메서드`이다. 첫 번째 인수는 위와 같이 `자신의 객체나 클래스가 아니다`.

### Instance Methods

When you see an initial self argument in methods within a class definition, it’s an instance method. These are the types of methods that you would normally write when creating your own classes. The first parameter of an instance method is self, and Python passes the object to the method when you call it. These are the ones that you’ve seen so far.

### Class Methods

In contrast, a class method affects the class as a whole. Any change you make to the class affects all of its objects. Within a class definition, a preceding @classmethod decorator indicates that that following function is a class method. Also, the first parameter to the method is the class itself. The Python tradition is to call the parameter cls, because class is a reserved word and can’t be used here. Let’s define a class method for A that counts how many object instances have been made from it:

```python
>>> class A ():
...     count = 0
...     def __init__(self):
...         A.count += 1
...     def exclaim(self):
...         print ("I'm an A!")
...     @classmethod
...     def kids(cls):
...         print ("A has", cls.count, "little objects.")

>>> easy_a = A()
>>> breezy_a = A()
>>> wheezy_a = A()
>>> A.kids()
A has 3 little objects.
```
Notice that we referred to `A.count` (the class attribute) in `__init__()` rather than `self.count` (which would be an object instance attribute). In the kids() method, we used `cls.count`, but we could just as well have used `A.count`.

### Static Methods

A third type of method in a class definition affects neither the class nor its objects; it’s just in there for convenience instead of floating around on its own. It’s a static method, preceded by a @staticmethod decorator, with no initial self or cls parameter. Here’s an example that serves as a commercial for the class CoyoteWeapon:

```python
>>> class CoyoteWeapon ():
... @staticmethod
... def commercial():
... print ('This CoyoteWeapon has been brought to you by Acme')
...
>>>
>>> CoyoteWeapon.commercial()
This CoyoteWeapon has been brought to you by Acme
```

Notice that we didn’t need to create an object from class CoyoteWeapon to access this method. Very class-y.

## Duck Typing

{: .note}
> Python has a loose implementation of `polymorphism`;    
it applies the same operation to different objects, based on the method’s name and arguments, regardless of their class.

Let’s use the same `__init__()` initializer for all three Quote classes now, but add two new functions:

- who() just returns the value of the saved person string
- says() returns the saved words string with the specific punctuation

And here they are in action:

```python
>>> class Quote ():
...     def __init__(self, person, words):
...         self.person = person
...         self.words = words
...     def who(self):
...         return self.person
...     def says(self):
...         return self.words + '.'
...
>>> class QuestionQuote (Quote):
...     def says(self):
...         return self.words + '?'
...
>>> class ExclamationQuote (Quote):
...     def says(self):
...         return self.words + '!'
...
>>>
```
We didn’t change how QuestionQuote or ExclamationQuote were initialized, so we didn’t override their `__init__()` methods. Python then automatically calls the `__init__()` method of the parent class Quote to store the instance variables person

and words. That’s why we can access self.words in objects created from the subclasses QuestionQuote and ExclamationQuote.

Next up, let’s make some objects:

```python
>>> hunter = Quote('Elmer Fudd', "I'm hunting wabbits")
>>> print (hunter.who(), 'says:', hunter.says())
Elmer Fudd says: I'm hunting wabbits.
```


```python
>>> hunted1 = QuestionQuote('Bugs Bunny', "What's up, doc")
>>> print (hunted1.who(), 'says:', hunted1.says())
Bugs Bunny says: What's up, doc?
```
```python
>>> hunted2 = ExclamationQuote('Daffy Duck', "It's rabbit season")
>>> print (hunted2.who(), 'says:', hunted2.says())
Daffy Duck says: It's rabbit season!
```
Three different versions of the says() method provide different behavior for the three classes. This is traditional polymorphism in object-oriented languages. Python goes a little further and lets you run the who() and says() methods of any objects that have them. Let’s define a class called BabblingBrook that has no relation to our previous woodsy hunter and huntees (descendants of the Quote class):

```python
>>> class BabblingBrook ():
...     def who(self):
...         return 'Brook'
...     def says(self):
...         return 'Babble'
...
>>> brook = BabblingBrook()
```
Now run the who() and says() methods of various objects, one (brook) completely unrelated to the others:

```python
>>> def who_says(obj):
...     print (obj.who(), 'says', obj.says())
...
>>> who_says(hunter)
Elmer Fudd says I'm hunting wabbits.
>>> who_says(hunted1)
Bugs Bunny says What's up, doc?
>>> who_says(hunted2)
Daffy Duck says It's rabbit season!
>>> who_says(brook)
Brook says Babble
```
This behavior is sometimes called duck typing, after the old saying:

Who are we to argue with a wise saying about ducks?


## Magic Methods

You can now create and use basic objects. What you’ll learn in this section might surprise you—in a good way.

When you type something such as a = 3 + 8, how do the integer objects with values 3 and 8 know how to implement +? Or, if you type name = "Daffy" + " " + "Duck", how does Python know that + now means to concatenate these strings? And how do a and name know how to use = to get the result? You can get at these operators by using Python’s `special methods` (or, more dramatically, `magic methods`).

The names of these methods begin and end with double underscores (`__`). Why?

They’re very unlikely to have been chosen by programmers as variable names. You’ve already seen one: `__init__()` initializes a newly created object from its class definition and any arguments that were passed in. You’ve also seen (“Name Mangling for Privacy” on page 184 ) how “dunder” naming helps to mangle class attribute names as well as methods.

Suppose that you have a simple Word class, and you want an equals() method that compares two words but ignores case. That is, a Word containing the value 'ha' would be considered equal to one containing 'HA'.


The example that follows is a first attempt, with a normal method we’re calling equals(). self.text is the text string that this Word object contains, and the equals() method compares it with the text string of word2 (another Word object):

```python
>>> class Word ():
...     def __init__(self, text):
...         self.text = text
...
...     def equals(self, word2):
...         return self.text.lower() == word2.text.lower()
...
```
Then, make three Word objects from three different text strings:

```python
>>> first = Word('ha')
>>> second = Word('HA')
>>> third = Word('eh')
```
When strings 'ha' and 'HA' are compared to lowercase, they should be equal:

```python
>>> first.equals(second)
True
```
But the string 'eh' will not match 'ha':

```python
>>> first.equals(third)
False
```
We defined the method equals() to do this lowercase conversion and comparison. It would be nice to just say if first == second, just like Python’s built-in types. So, let’s do that. We change the equals() method to the special name `__eq__()` (you’ll see why in a moment):

```python
>>> class Word ():
...     def __init__(self, text):
...         self.text = text
...     def __eq__(self, word2):
...         return self.text.lower() == word2.text.lower()
...
```
Let’s see whether it works:

```python
>>> first = Word('ha')
>>> second = Word('HA')
>>> third = Word('eh')
>>> first == second
True
>>> first == third
False
```
Magic! All we needed was the Python’s special method name for testing equality, `__eq__()`. Tables 10-1 and 10-2 list the names of the most useful magic methods.


Table 10-1. Magic methods for comparison

<div class="code-example" markdown="1">

|         Method        |   Description   |
|:----------------------|:----------------|
| __eq__( self, other ) | self == other   |
| __ne__( self, other ) | self != other   |
| __lt__( self, other ) | self < other    |
| __gt__( self, other ) | self > other    |
| __le__( self, other ) | self <= other   |
| __ge__( self, other ) | self >= other   |

</div>

Table 10-2. Magic methods for math

<div class="code-example1" markdown="1">

| Method                      | Description   |
|:----------------------------|:--------------|
| __add__( self, other )      | self + other  |
| __sub__( self, other )      | self – other  |
| __mul__( self, other )      | self * other  |
| __floordiv__( self, other ) | self // other |
| __truediv__( self, other )  | self / other  |
| __mod__( self, other )      | self % other  |
| __pow__( self, other )      | self ** other |

</div>

You aren’t restricted to use the math operators such as `+` (magic method `__add__()`) and `–` (magic method `__sub__()`) with numbers. For instance, Python string objects use `+` for concatenation and `*` for duplication. There are many more, documented online at Special method names. The most common among them are presented in Table 10-3.

Table 10-3. Other, miscellaneous magic methods

<div class="code-example2" markdown="1">

| Method           | Description   |
|:-----------------|:--------------|
| __str__( self )  | str( self )   |
| __repr__( self ) | repr( self )  |
| __len__( self )  | len( self )   |

</div>

Besides `__init__()`, you might find yourself using `__str__()` the most in your own methods. It’s how you print your object. It’s used by print(), str(), and the string formatters, which you can read about in Chapter 5. The interactive interpreter uses the `__repr__()` function to echo variables to output. If you fail to define either `__str__()` or `__repr__()`, you get Python’s default string version of your object:

```
>>> first = Word('ha')
>>> first
<__main__.Word object at 0x1006ba3d0>
```

```
>>> print (first)
<__main__.Word object at 0x1006ba3d0>
```
Let’s add both `__str__()` and `__repr__()` methods to the Word class to make it prettier:

```python
>>> class Word ():
...     def __init__(self, text):
...         self.text = text
...     def __eq__(self, word2):
...         return self.text.lower() == word2.text.lower()
...     def __str__(self):
...         return self.text
...     def __repr__(self):
...         return 'Word("' + self.text + '")'
```
```python
>>> first = Word('ha')
>>> first         # uses __repr__      : print(repr(first))
Word("ha")
>>> print (first) # uses __str__
ha
```
To explore even more special methods, check out the [Python documentation](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html#special-method-names).

## Aggregation and Composition

Inheritance is a good technique to use when you want a child class to act like its parent class most of the time (when child `is-a` parent). It’s tempting to build elaborate inheritance hierarchies, but sometimes *composition* or *aggregation* make more sense.

What’s the difference? In composition, one thing is part of another. A duck is-a bird (inheritance), but `has-a` tail (`composition`). A tail is not a kind of duck, but part of a duck. In this next example, let’s make bill and tail objects and provide them to a new duck object:

```python
>>> class Bill ():
...     def __init__(self, description):
...         self.description = description
...
>>> class Tail ():
...     def __init__(self, length):
...         self.length = length
...
>>> class Duck ():
...     def __init__(self, bill, tail):
...         self.bill = bill
...         self.tail = tail
...         def about(self):
...             print ('This duck has a', self.bill.description,
...             'bill and a', self.tail.length, 'tail')
...
>>> a_tail = Tail('long')
>>> a_bill = Bill('wide orange')
>>> duck = Duck(a_bill, a_tail)
>>> duck.about()
This duck has a wide orange bill and a long tail
```
Aggregation expresses relationships, but is a little looser: one thing uses another, but both exist independently. A duck uses a lake, but one is not a part of the other.

## When to Use Objects or Something Else

<!-- Here are some guidelines for deciding whether to put your code and data in a class, module (discussion coming in Chapter 11), or something entirely different:

- Objects are most useful when you need a number of individual instances that have similar behavior (methods), but differ in their internal states (attributes).
- Classes support inheritance, modules don’t.
- If you want only one of something, a module might be best. No matter how many times a Python module is referenced in a program, only one copy is loaded. (Java and C++ programmers: you can use a Python module as a singleton.)
- If you have a number of variables that contain multiple values and can be passed as arguments to multiple functions, it might be better to define them as classes.
    For example, you might use a dictionary with keys such as size and color to represent a color image. You could create a different dictionary for each image in your program, and pass them as arguments to functions such as scale() or transform(). This can get messy as you add keys and functions. It’s more coherent to define an Image class with attributes size or color and methods scale()
    and transform(). Then, all the data and methods for a color image are defined in
    one place.
- Use the simplest solution to the problem. A dictionary, list, or tuple is simpler, smaller, and faster than a module, which is usually simpler than a class.

Guido’s advice:

```
Avoid overengineering datastructures. Tuples are better than objects (try namedtuple, too, though). Prefer simple fields over getter/setter functions...Built-in datatypes are your friends. Use more numbers, strings, tuples, lists, sets, dicts.
Also check out the collections library, especially deque.
—Guido van Rossum
```
- A newer alternative is the dataclass, in “Dataclasses” on page 196. -->
클래스, 모듈의 사용 지침은 다음과 같다.
- 비슷한 행동(메서드)을 하지만 내부 상태(속성)가 다른 개별 인스턴스가 필요할 때, 객체는 매우 유용하다.
- 클래스는 상속을 지원하지만, 모듈은 상속을 지원하지 않는다.
- 어떤 한 가지 일만 수행한다면 모듈이 가장 좋은 선택일 것이다. 프로그램에서 파이썬 모둘이 참조된 횟수에 상관업이 단 하나의 복사본만 불러온다.
- 여러 함수에 인수로 전달하는 여러 변수가 있다면, 클래스를 정의하는 것이 더 좋다. 예를 들어 화상 이미지를 나타내기 위해 size, color를 딕셔너리의 키로 사용한다고 가정해 보자. 프로그램에서 각 이미지에 대한 딕셔너리를 생성하고, scale(), transform() 같은 함수에 인수를 전달할 수 있다. 키와 함수를 추가하면 코드가 지저분해질 수도 있다. size, color를 속성으로하고 scale(), transform()을 메서드로 하는 이미지 클래스를 정의하는 것이 더 일관성이 있다. 색상 이미지에 대한 모든 데이터와 메서들르 한 곳에 정의할 수 있기 때문이다.
- 가장 간단한 문제 해결법을 사용한다. 딕셔너리, 리스트, 튜플은 모듈보다 더 작고 간단하며 빠르다. 그리고 일반적으로 모듈은 클래스보다 더 간단하다.

## Named Tuples

Because Guido just mentioned them and I haven’t yet, this is a good place to talk about `named tuples`. A named tuple is a subclass of tuples with which you can access values by name (with `_.name_` ) as well as by position (with `[ _offset_ ]`).

Let’s take the example from the previous section and convert the Duck class to a named tuple, with bill and tail as simple string attributes. We’ll call the namedtuple function with two arguments:

- The name
- A string of the field names, separated by spaces

Named tuples are not automatically supplied with Python, so you need to load a module before using them. We do that in the first line of the following example:

```python
>>> from collections import namedtuple
>>> Duck = namedtuple('Duck', 'bill tail')
>>> duck = Duck('wide orange', 'long')
>>> duck
Duck(bill='wide orange', tail='long')
>>> duck.bill
'wide orange'
>>> duck.tail
'long'
```
You can also make a named tuple from a dictionary:

```python
>>> parts = {'bill': 'wide orange', 'tail': 'long'}
>>> duck2 = Duck(**parts)
>>> duck2
Duck(bill='wide orange', tail='long')
```
In the preceding code, take a look at **parts. This is a keyword argument. It extracts the keys and values from the parts dictionary and supplies them as arguments to Duck(). It has the same effect as:

```python
>>> duck2 = Duck(bill = 'wide orange', tail = 'long')
```
Named tuples are immutable, but you can replace one or more fields and return another named tuple:

```python
>>> duck3 = duck2._replace(tail='magnificent', bill='crushing')
>>> duck3
Duck(bill='crushing', tail='magnificent')
```
We could have defined duck as a dictionary:

```python
>>> duck_dict = {'bill': 'wide orange', 'tail': 'long'}
>>> duck_dict
{'tail': 'long', 'bill': 'wide orange'}
```

You can add fields to a dictionary:

```python
>>> duck_dict['color'] = 'green'
>>> duck_dict
{'color': 'green', 'tail': 'long', 'bill': 'wide orange'}
```
But not to a named tuple:

```python
>>> duck.color = 'green'
Traceback (most recent call last):
File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
AttributeError: 'Duck' object has no attribute 'color'
```
<!-- To recap, here are some of the pros of a named tuple:

- It looks and acts like an immutable object.
- It is more space and time efficient than objects.
- You can access attributes by using dot notation instead of dictionary-style square brackets.
- You can use it as a dictionary key. -->

네임드 튜플의 특징을 정리하면 다음과 같다.
- 불변 객체처럼 행동한다.
- 객체보다 공간 효율성과 시간 효율성이 더 좋다.
- 딕셔너리 형식의 대괄호([ ])대신 온점(.)표기법으로 속성을 접근할 수 있다.
- 네임드 튜플을 딕셔너리의 키처럼 쓸 수 있다.

## Dataclasses

Many people like to create objects mainly to store data (as object attributes), not so much behavior (methods). You just saw how named tuples can be an alternative data store. Python 3.7 introduced dataclasses.

Here’s a plain old object with a single name attribute:

```python
>> class TeenyClass():
...     def __init__(self, name):
...         self.name = name
...
>>> teeny = TeenyClass('itsy')
>>> teeny.name
'itsy'
```
Doing the same with a dataclass looks a little different:

```python
>>> from dataclasses import dataclass
>>> @dataclass
... class TeenyDataClass :
...     name: str
...
>>> teeny = TeenyDataClass('bitsy')
>>> teeny.name
'bitsy'
```
Besides needing a @dataclass decorator, you define the class’s attributes using [variable annotations](https://oreil.ly/NyGfE) of the form `_name_ : _type_` or `_name_ : _type_ = _val_` , like color: str or color: str = "red". The `_type_` can be any Python object type, including classes you’ve created, not just the built-in ones like str or int.

When you’re creating the dataclass object, you provide the arguments in the order in which they were specified in the class, or use named arguments in any order:

```python
>>> from dataclasses import dataclass
>>> @dataclass
... class AnimalClass :
...     name: str
...     habitat: str
...     teeth: int = 0
```
```python
>>> snowman = AnimalClass('yeti', 'Himalayas', 46)
>>> duck = AnimalClass(habitat='lake', name='duck')
>>> snowman
AnimalClass(name='yeti', habitat='Himalayas', teeth=46)
>>> duck
AnimalClass(name='duck', habitat='lake', teeth=0)
```
AnimalClass defined a default value for its teeth attribute, so we didn’t need to provide it when making a duck.

You can refer to the object attributes like any other object’s:

```python
>>> duck.habitat
'lake'
>>> snowman.teeth
46
```
There’s a lot more to dataclasses. See this [guide](https://realpython.com/python-data-classes/) or the [official (heavy) docs](https://peps.python.org/pep-0557/).

## Attrs

You’ve seen how to create classes and add attributes, and how they can involve a lot of typing—things like defining `__init__()`, assigning its arguments to self counterparts, and creating all those dunder methods like `__str__()`. Named tuples and data‐classes are alternatives in the standard library that may be easier when you mainly want to create a data collection.

[The One Python Library Everyone Needs](https://glyph.twistedmatrix.com/2016/08/attrs.html) compares plain classes, named tuples, and dataclasses. It recommends the third-party package [attrs](https://www.attrs.org/en/stable/) for many reasons—less typing, data validation, and more. Take a look and see whether you prefer it to the built-in solutions.

## Coming Up

In the next chapter, you’ll step up a level in code structures to Python modules and packages.


## Things to Do

10.1 Make a class called Thing with no contents and print it. Then, create an object called example from this class and also print it. Are the printed values the same or different?

10.2 Make a new class called Thing2 and assign the value 'abc' to a class attribute called letters. Print letters.

10.3 Make yet another class called, of course, Thing3. This time, assign the value 'xyz' to an instance (object) attribute called letters. Print letters. Do you need to make an object from the class to do this?
```python
class Thing :
    pass

example = Thing()

thing2 = Thing()
thing2.letters = 'abc'
print(thing2.letters)

thing3 = Thing()
thing3.letters = 'xyz'
print(thing3.letters)
```
10.4 Make a class called Element, with instance attributes name, symbol, and number.
Create an object of this class with the values 'Hydrogen', 'H', and 1.
```python
class Element:
    def __init__(self,name, symbol, number):
        self.name = name
        self.symbol = symbol
        self.number = number
        
e1 = Element('Hydrogen', 'H', 1)
```
10.5 Make a dictionary with these keys and values: 'name': 'Hydrogen', 'symbol':

'H', 'number': 1. Then, create an object called hydrogen from class Element using this dictionary.
```python
d = { 'name': 'Hydrogen', 'symbol':'H', 'number': 1 }

hydrogen = Element(**d)
```
10.6 For the Element class, define a method called dump() that prints the values of the object’s attributes (name, symbol, and number). Create the hydrogen object from this new definition and use dump() to print its attributes.
```python
class Element2(Element):

    def __init__(self, name, symbol, number):
        super().__init__(name, symbol, number)
    def dump(self):
        result = {'name':self.name,'symbol':self.symbol,'number':self.number}
        return result

e2 = Element2(**d)
print(e2.dump())  # {'name': 'Hydrogen', 'symbol': 'H', 'number': 1}
```
10.7 Call print(hydrogen). In the definition of Element, change the name of the method dump to `__str__`, create a new hydrogen object, and call print(hydrogen) again.
```python
class Element3(Element2):

    def __init__(self, name, symbol, number):
        super().__init__(name, symbol, number)
    def dump(self):
        result = {'name':self.name,'symbol':self.symbol,'number':self.number}
        return result
    
    def __str__(self):
        dic = self.dump()
        s = ""
        for k,v in dic.items():
            s += (k + ":" + str(v) + " ")
            
        return s
    
e3 = Element3(**d)
print(e3)
```
10.8 Modify Element to make the attributes name, symbol, and number private. Define a getter property for each to return its value.
```python
class Element :
    def __init__(self, name, symbol, number):
        self.__name = name
        self.__symbol = symbol
        self.__number = number
    @property
    def name(self):
        return self.__name
    @property
    def symbol(self):
        return self.__symbol
    @property
    def number(self):
        return self.__number

hydrogen = Element('Hydrogen', 'H', 1)
print(hydrogen.name) # 'Hydrogen'
```
10.9 Define three classes: Bear, Rabbit, and Octothorpe. For each, define only one method: eats(). This should return 'berries' (Bear), 'clover' (Rabbit), or 'campers' (Octothorpe). Create one object from each and print what it eats.
```python
class Bear:
    def eat(self):
        return "berries"
    
class Rabbit:
    def eat(self):
        return 'clover'    
       
class Octothorpe:
    def eat(self):
        return 'campers'

def aminal(obj):
    return obj.eat()

print(aminal(Bear()))
```
10.10 Define these classes: Laser, Claw, and SmartPhone. Each has only one method: does(). This returns 'disintegrate' (Laser), 'crush' (Claw), or 'ring' (Smart Phone). Then, define the class Robot that has one instance (object) of each of these.

Define a does() method for the Robot that prints what its component objects do.
```python
class Laser:
    def does(self):
        return 'disintegrate'

class Claw :
    def does(self):
        return 'crush'
    
class SmartPhone :
    def does(self):
        return 'ring'

class Robot :
    def __init__(self):
        self.laser = Laser()
        self.claw = Claw()
        self.smartphone = SmartPhone()
    def does(self):
        return """I have many attachments: My laser, to %s.My claw, to %s.My smartphone, to %s.""" \
            %(self.laser.does(), self.claw.does(), self.smartphone.does())
robbie = Robot()
print ( robbie.does() )
```