**22. Py Sci................................................................... 485**
    Math and Statistics in the Standard Library 485
       Math Functions 485
       Working with Complex Numbers 487
       Calculate Accurate Floating Point with decimal 488
       Perform Rational Arithmetic with fractions 489
       Use Packed Sequences with array 489
       Handling Simple Stats with statistics 489
       Matrix Multiplication 490
    Scientific Python 490
    NumPy 490
       Make an Array with array() 491
       Make an Array with arange() 491
       Make an Array with zeros(), ones(), or random() 492
       Change an Array’s Shape with reshape() 493
       Get an Element with [] 494
       Array Math 495
       Linear Algebra 496
    SciPy 497
    SciKit 497
    Pandas 498
    Python and Scientific Areas 498
    Coming Up 500
    Things to Do 500

**CHAPTER 22**

**Py Sci**

```
In her reign the power of steam
On land and sea became supreme,
And all now have strong reliance
In fresh victories of science.
—James McIntyre, Queen’s Jubilee Ode 1887
```
In the past few years, largely because of the software you’ll see in this chapter, Python

has become extremely popular with scientists. If you’re a scientist or student yourself,

you might have used tools like MATLAB and R, or traditional languages such as Java,

C, or C++. Now you’ll see how Python makes an excellent platform for scientific

analysis and publishing.

### Math and Statistics in the Standard Library

First, let’s take a little trip back to the standard library and visit some features and

modules that we’ve ignored.

#### Math Functions

Python has a menagerie of math functions in the standard math library. Just type

**import math** to access them from your programs.

It has a few constants such as pi and e:

```
>>> import math
>>> math.pi
>>> 3.141592653589793
>>> math.e
2.718281828459045
```
Most of it consists of functions, so let’s look at the most useful ones.

##### 485


fabs() returns the absolute value of its argument:

```
>>> math.fabs(98.6)
98.6
>>> math.fabs(-271.1)
271.1
```
Get the integer below (floor()) and above (ceil()) some number:

```
>>> math.floor(98.6)
98
>>> math.floor(-271.1)
-272
>>> math.ceil(98.6)
99
>>> math.ceil(-271.1)
-271
```
Calculate the factorial (in math, n !) by using factorial():

```
>>> math.factorial(0)
1
>>> math.factorial(1)
1
>>> math.factorial(2)
2
>>> math.factorial(3)
6
>>> math.factorial(10)
3628800
```
Get the logarithm of the argument in base e with log():

```
>>> math.log(1.0)
0.0
>>> math.log(math.e)
1.0
```
If you want a different base for the log, provide it as a second argument:

```
>>> math.log(8, 2)
3.0
```
The function pow() does the opposite, raising a number to a power:

```
>>> math.pow(2, 3)
8.0
```
Python also has the built-in exponentiation operator ** to do the same, but it doesn’t

automatically convert the result to a float if the base and power are both integers:

```
>>> 2**3
8
>>> 2.0**3
8.0
```
**486 | Chapter 22: Py Sci**


Get a square root with sqrt():

```
>>> math.sqrt(100.0)
10.0
```
Don’t try to trick this function; it’s seen it all before:

```
>>> math.sqrt(-100.0)
Traceback (most recent call last):
File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
ValueError: math domain error
```
The usual trigonometric functions are all there, and I’ll just list their names here:

sin(), cos(), tan(), asin(), acos(), atan(), and atan2(). If you remember the

Pythagorean theorem (or can say it fast three times without spitting), the math

library also has a hypot() function to calculate the hypotenuse from two sides:

```
>>> x = 3.0
>>> y = 4.0
>>> math.hypot(x, y)
5.0
```
If you don’t trust all these fancy functions, you can work it out yourself:

```
>>> math.sqrt(x*x + y*y)
5.0
>>> math.sqrt(x**2 + y**2)
5.0
```
A last set of functions converts angular coordinates:

```
>>> math.radians(180.0)
3.141592653589793
>>> math.degrees(math.pi)
180.0
```
#### Working with Complex Numbers

Complex numbers are fully supported in the base Python language, with their famil‐

iar notation of real and imaginary parts:

```
>>> # a real number
... 5
5
>>> # an imaginary number
... 8j
8j
>>> # an imaginary number
... 3 + 2j
(3+2j)
```
```
Math and Statistics in the Standard Library | 487
```

Because the imaginary number i (1j in Python) is defined as the square root of –1,

we can execute the following:

```
>>> 1j * 1j
(-1+0j)
>>> (7 + 1j) * 1j
(-1+7j)
```
Some complex math functions are in the standard cmath module.

#### Calculate Accurate Floating Point with decimal

Floating-point numbers in computers are not quite like the real numbers we learned

in school:

```
>>> x = 10.0 / 3.0
>>> x
3.3333333333333335
```
Hey, what’s that 5 at the end? It should be 3 all the way down. This happens because

there are only so many bits in computer CPU registers, and numbers that aren’t exact

powers of two can’t be represented exactly.

With Python’s decimal module, you can represent numbers to your desired level of

significance. This is especially important for calculations involving money. US cur‐

rency doesn’t go lower than a cent (a hundredth of a dollar), so if we’re calculating

money amounts as dollars and cents, we want to be accurate to the penny. If we try to

represent dollars and cents through floating-point values such as 19.99 and 0.06, we’ll

lose some significance way down in the end bits before we even begin calculating

with them. How do we handle this? Easy. We use the decimal module, instead:

```
>>> from decimal import Decimal
>>> price = Decimal('19.99')
>>> tax = Decimal('0.06')
>>> total = price + (price * tax)
>>> total
Decimal('21.1894')
```
We created the price and tax with string values to preserve their significance. The

total calculation maintained all the significant fractions of a cent, but we want to get

the nearest cent:

```
>>> penny = Decimal('0.01')
>>> total.quantize(penny)
Decimal('21.19')
```
You might get the same results with plain old floats and rounding, but not always.

You could also multiply everything by 100 and use integer cents in your calculations,

but that will bite you eventually, too.

**488 | Chapter 22: Py Sci**


#### Perform Rational Arithmetic with fractions

You can represent numbers as a numerator divided by a denominator through the

standard Python fractions module. Here is a simple operation multiplying one-

third by two-thirds:

```
>>> from fractions import Fraction
>>> Fraction(1, 3) * Fraction(2, 3)
Fraction(2, 9)
```
Floating-point arguments can be inexact, so you can use Decimal within Fraction:

```
>>> Fraction(1.0/3.0)
Fraction(6004799503160661, 18014398509481984)
>>> Fraction(Decimal('1.0')/Decimal('3.0'))
Fraction(3333333333333333333333333333, 10000000000000000000000000000)
```
Get the greatest common divisor of two numbers with the gcd function:

```
>>> import fractions
>>> fractions.gcd(24, 16)
8
```
#### Use Packed Sequences with array

A Python list is more like a linked list than an array. If you want a one-dimensional

sequence of the same type, use the array type. It uses less space than a list and sup‐

ports many list methods. Create one with array( _typecode_ , _initializer_ ). The

typecode specifies the data type (like int or float) and the optional _initializer_

contains initial values, which you can specify as a list, string, or iterable.

I’ve never used this package for real work. It’s a low-level data structure, useful for

things such as image data. If you actually need an array—especially with more then

one dimension—to do numeric calculations, you’re much better off with NumPy,

which we discuss momentarily.

#### Handling Simple Stats with statistics

Beginning with Python 3.4, statistics is a standard module. It has the usual func‐

tions: mean, media, mode, standard deviation, variance, and so on. Input arguments

are sequences (lists or tuples) or iterators of various numeric data types: int, float,

decimal, and fraction. One function, mode, also accepts strings. Many more statistical

functions are available in packages such as SciPy and Pandas, featured later in this

chapter.

```
Math and Statistics in the Standard Library | 489
```

#### Matrix Multiplication

Starting with Python 3.5, you’ll see the @ character doing something out of character.

It will still be used for decorators, but it will also have a new use for matrix multiplica‐

tion. If you’re using an older version of Python, NumPy (coming right up) is your

best bet.

### Scientific Python

The rest of this chapter covers third-party Python packages for science and math.

Although you can install them individually, you should consider downloading all of

them at once as part of a scientific Python distribution. Here are your main choices:

Anaconda

```
Free, extensive, up-to-the-minute, supports Python 2 and 3, and won’t clobber
your existing system Python
```
Enthought Canopy

Available in both free and commercial versions

Python(x,y)

A Windows-only release

Pyzo

Based on some tools from Anaconda, plus a few others

I recommend installing Anaconda. It’s big, but everything in this chapter is in there.

The examples in the rest of this chapter will assume that you’ve installed the required

packages, either individually or as part of Anaconda.

### NumPy

NumPy is one of the main reasons for Python’s popularity among scientists. You’ve

heard that dynamic languages such as Python are often slower than compiled lan‐

guages like C, or even other interpreted languages such as Java. NumPy was written

to provide fast multidimensional numeric arrays, similar to scientific languages like

FORTRAN. You get the speed of C with the developer-friendly nature of Python.

If you’ve downloaded one of the scientific Python distributions, you already have

NumPy. If not, follow the instructions on the NumPy download page.

To begin with NumPy, you should understand a core data structure, a multidimen‐

sional array called an ndarray (for N-dimensional array) or just an array. Unlike

Python’s lists and tuples, each element needs to be of the same type. NumPy refers to

an array’s number of dimensions as its rank. A one-dimensional array is like a row of

values, a two-dimensional array is like a table of rows and columns, and a three-

**490 | Chapter 22: Py Sci**


dimensional array is like a Rubik’s Cube. The lengths of the dimensions need not be

the same.

```
The NumPy array and the standard Python array are not the
same thing. For the rest of this chapter, when I say array, I’m refer‐
ring to a NumPy array.
```
But why do you need an array?

- Scientific data often consists of large sequences of data.
- Scientific calculations on this data often use matrix math, regression, simulation,
    and other techniques that process many data points at a time.
- NumPy handles arrays much faster than standard Python lists or tuples.

There are many ways to make a NumPy array.

#### Make an Array with array()

You can make an array from a normal list or tuple:

```
>>> b = np.array( [2, 4, 6, 8] )
>>> b
array([2, 4, 6, 8])
```
The attribute ndim returns the rank:

```
>>> b.ndim
1
```
The total number of values in the array are given by size:

```
>>> b.size
4
```
The number of values in each rank are returned by shape:

```
>>> b.shape
(4,)
```
#### Make an Array with arange()

NumPy’s arange() method is similar to Python’s standard range(). If you call

arange() with a single integer argument num, it returns an ndarray from 0 to num-1:

```
>>> import numpy as np
>>> a = np.arange(10)
>>> a
array([0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9])
```
```
NumPy | 491
```

```
>>> a.ndim
1
>>> a.shape
(10,)
>>> a.size
10
```
With two values, it creates an array from the first to the last, minus one:

```
>>> a = np.arange(7, 11)
>>> a
array([ 7, 8, 9, 10])
```
And you can provide a step size to use instead of one as a third argument:

```
>>> a = np.arange(7, 11, 2)
>>> a
array([7, 9])
```
So far, our examples have used integers, but floats work just fine:

```
>>> f = np.arange(2.0, 9.8, 0.3)
>>> f
array([ 2. , 2.3, 2.6, 2.9, 3.2, 3.5, 3.8, 4.1, 4.4, 4.7, 5. ,
5.3, 5.6, 5.9, 6.2, 6.5, 6.8, 7.1, 7.4, 7.7, 8. , 8.3,
8.6, 8.9, 9.2, 9.5, 9.8])
```
And one last trick: the dtype argument tells arange what type of values to produce:

```
>>> g = np.arange(10, 4, -1.5, dtype=np.float)
>>> g
array([ 10. , 8.5, 7. , 5.5])
```
#### Make an Array with zeros(), ones(), or random()

The zeros() method returns an array in which all the values are zero. The argument

you provide is a tuple with the shape that you want. Here’s a one-dimensional array:

```
>>> a = np.zeros((3,))
>>> a
array([ 0., 0., 0.])
>>> a.ndim
1
>>> a.shape
(3,)
>>> a.size
3
```
This one is of rank two:

```
>>> b = np.zeros((2, 4))
>>> b
array([[ 0., 0., 0., 0.],
[ 0., 0., 0., 0.]])
>>> b.ndim
```
**492 | Chapter 22: Py Sci**


##### 2

```
>>> b.shape
(2, 4)
>>> b.size
8
```
The other special function that fills an array with the same value is ones():

```
>>> import numpy as np
>>> k = np.ones((3, 5))
>>> k
array([[ 1., 1., 1., 1., 1.],
[ 1., 1., 1., 1., 1.],
[ 1., 1., 1., 1., 1.]])
```
One last initializer creates an array with random values between 0.0 and 1.0:

```
>>> m = np.random.random((3, 5))
>>> m
array([[ 1.92415699e-01, 4.43131404e-01, 7.99226773e-01,
1.14301942e-01, 2.85383430e-04],
[ 6.53705749e-01, 7.48034559e-01, 4.49463241e-01,
4.87906915e-01, 9.34341118e-01],
[ 9.47575562e-01, 2.21152583e-01, 2.49031209e-01,
3.46190961e-01, 8.94842676e-01]])
```
#### Change an Array’s Shape with reshape()

So far, an array doesn’t seem that different from a list or tuple. One difference is that

you can get it to do tricks such as change its shape by using reshape():

```
>>> a = np.arange(10)
>>> a
array([0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9])
>>> a = a.reshape(2, 5)
>>> a
array([[0, 1, 2, 3, 4],
[5, 6, 7, 8, 9]])
>>> a.ndim
2
>>> a.shape
(2, 5)
>>> a.size
10
```
You can reshape the same array in different ways:

```
>>> a = a.reshape(5, 2)
>>> a
array([[0, 1],
[2, 3],
[4, 5],
[6, 7],
[8, 9]])
```
```
NumPy | 493
```

```
>>> a.ndim
2
>>> a.shape
(5, 2)
>>> a.size
10
```
Assigning a shapely tuple to shape does the same thing:

```
>>> a.shape = (2, 5)
>>> a
array([[0, 1, 2, 3, 4],
[5, 6, 7, 8, 9]])
```
The only restriction on a shape is that the product of the rank sizes needs to equal the

total number of values (in this case, 10):

```
>>> a = a.reshape(3, 4)
Traceback (most recent call last):
File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
ValueError: total size of new array must be unchanged
```
#### Get an Element with []

A one-dimensional array works like a list:

```
>>> a = np.arange(10)
>>> a[7]
7
>>> a[-1]
9
```
However, if the array has a different shape, use comma-separated indices within the

square brackets:

```
>>> a.shape = (2, 5)
>>> a
array([[0, 1, 2, 3, 4],
[5, 6, 7, 8, 9]])
>>> a[1,2]
7
```
**494 | Chapter 22: Py Sci**


That’s different from a two-dimensional Python list, which has its indexes in separate

square brackets:

```
>>> l = [ [0, 1, 2, 3, 4], [5, 6, 7, 8, 9] ]
>>> l
[[0, 1, 2, 3, 4], [5, 6, 7, 8, 9]]
>>> l[1,2]
Traceback (most recent call last):
File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
TypeError: list indices must be integers, not tuple
>>> l[1][2]
7
```
One last thing: slices work, but again, only within one set of square brackets. Let’s

make our familiar test array again:

```
>>> a = np.arange(10)
>>> a = a.reshape(2, 5)
>>> a
array([[0, 1, 2, 3, 4],
[5, 6, 7, 8, 9]])
```
Use a slice to get the first row, elements from offset 2 to the end:

```
>>> a[0, 2:]
array([2, 3, 4])
```
Now, get the last row, elements up to the third from the end:

```
>>> a[-1, :3]
array([5, 6, 7])
```
You can also assign a value to more than one element with a slice. The following

statement assigns the value 1000 to columns (offsets) 2 and 3 of all rows:

```
>>> a[:, 2:4] = 1000
>>> a
array([[ 0, 1, 1000, 1000, 4],
[ 5, 6, 1000, 1000, 9]])
```
#### Array Math

Making and reshaping arrays was so much fun that we almost forgot to actually do

something with them. For our first trick, we use NumPy’s redefined multiplication (*)

operator to multiply all the values in a NumPy array at once:

```
>>> from numpy import *
>>> a = arange(4)
>>> a
array([0, 1, 2, 3])
>>> a *= 3
>>> a
array([0, 3, 6, 9])
```
```
NumPy | 495
```

If you tried to multiply each element in a normal Python list by a number, you’d need

a loop or a list comprehension:

```
>>> plain_list = list(range(4))
>>> plain_list
[0, 1, 2, 3]
>>> plain_list = [num * 3 for num in plain_list]
>>> plain_list
[0, 3, 6, 9]
```
This all-at-once behavior also applies to addition, subtraction, division, and other

functions in the NumPy library. For example, you can initialize all members of an

array to any value by using zeros() and +:

```
>>> from numpy import *
>>> a = zeros((2, 5)) + 17.0
>>> a
array([[ 17., 17., 17., 17., 17.],
[ 17., 17., 17., 17., 17.]])
```
#### Linear Algebra

NumPy includes many functions for linear algebra. For example, let’s define this sys‐

tem of linear equations:

```
4x + 5y = 20
x + 2y = 13
```
How do we solve for x and y? We build two arrays:

- The coefficients (multipliers for x and y)
- The dependent variables (right side of the equation)

```
>>> import numpy as np
>>> coefficients = np.array([ [4, 5], [1, 2] ])
>>> dependents = np.array( [20, 13] )
```
Now, use the solve() function in the linalg module:

```
>>> answers = np.linalg.solve(coefficients, dependents)
>>> answers
array([ -8.33333333, 10.66666667])
```
The result says that x is about –8.3 and y is about 10.6. Did these numbers solve the

equation?

```
>>> 4 * answers[0] + 5 * answers[1]
20.0
>>> 1 * answers[0] + 2 * answers[1]
13.0
```
**496 | Chapter 22: Py Sci**


How about that. To avoid all that typing, you can also ask NumPy to get the dot prod‐

uct of the arrays for you:

```
>>> product = np.dot(coefficients, answers)
>>> product
array([ 20., 13.])
```
The values in the product array should be close to the values in dependents if this

solution is correct. You can use the allclose() function to check whether the arrays

are approximately equal (they might not be exactly equal because of floating-point

rounding):

```
>>> np.allclose(product, dependents)
True
```
NumPy also has modules for polynomials, Fourier transforms, statistics, and some

probability distributions.

### SciPy

There’s even more in a library of mathematical and statistical functions built on top of

NumPy: SciPy. The SciPy release includes NumPy, SciPy, Pandas (coming later in this

chapter), and other libraries.

SciPy includes many modules, including some for the following tasks:

- Optimization
- Statistics
- Interpolation
- Linear regression
- Integration
- Image processing
- Signal processing

If you’ve worked with other scientific computing tools, you’ll find that Python,

NumPy, and SciPy cover some of the same ground as the commercial MATLAB or

open source R.

### SciKit

In the same pattern of building on earlier software, SciKit is a group of scientific

packages built on SciPy. SciKit-Learn is a prominent machine learning package: it

supports modeling, classification, clustering, and various algorithms.

```
SciPy | 497
```

### Pandas

Recently, the phrase data science has become common. Some definitions that I’ve

seen include “statistics done on a Mac,” or “statistics done in San Francisco.” However

you define it, the tools we’ve talked about in this chapter—NumPy, SciPy, and the

subject of this section, Pandas—are components of a growing popular data-science

toolkit. (Mac and San Francisco are optional.)

Pandas is a new package for interactive data analysis. It’s especially useful for real-

world data manipulation, combining the matrix math of NumPy with the processing

ability of spreadsheets and relational databases. The book Python for Data Analysis:

Data Wrangling with Pandas, NumPy, and IPython by Wes McKinney (O’Reilly) cov‐

ers data wrangling with NumPy, IPython, and Pandas.

NumPy is oriented toward traditional scientific computing, which tends to manipu‐

late multidimensional data sets of a single type, usually floating point. Pandas is more

like a database editor, handling multiple data types in groups. In some languages,

such groups are called records or structures. Pandas defines a base data structure

called a DataFrame. This is an ordered collection of columns with names and types. It

has some resemblance to a database table, a Python named tuple, and a Python nes‐

ted dictionary. Its purpose is to simplify the handling of the kind of data you’re likely

to encounter not just in science, but also in business. In fact, Pandas was originally

designed to manipulate financial data, for which the most common alternative is a

spreadsheet.

Pandas is an ETL tool for real-world, messy data—missing values, oddball formats,

scattered measurements—of all data types. You can split, join, extend, fill in, convert,

reshape, slice, and load and save files. It integrates with the tools we’ve just discussed

—NumPy, SciPy, iPython—to calculate statistics, fit data to models, draw plots, pub‐

lish, and so on.

Most scientists just want to get their work done, without spending months to become

experts in esoteric computer languages or applications. With Python, they can

become productive more quickly.

### Python and Scientific Areas

We’ve been looking at Python tools that could be used in almost any area of science.

What about software and documentation targeted to specific scientific domains?

Here’s a small sample of Python’s use for specific problems, and some special-purpose

libraries:

**498 | Chapter 22: Py Sci**


General

- Python computations in science and engineering
- A crash course in Python for scientists

Physics

- Computational physics
- Astropy
- SunPy (solar data analysis)
- MetPy (meteorological data analysis)
- Py-ART (weather radar)
- Community Intercomparison Suite (atmospheric sciences)
- Freud (trajectory analysis)
- Platon (exoplanet atmospheres)
- PSI4 (quantum chemistry)
- OpenQuake Engine
- yt (volumetric data analysis)

Biology and medicine

- Biopython
- Python for biologists
- Introduction to Applied Bioinformatics
- Neuroimaging in Python
- MNE (neurophysiological data visualization)
- PyMedPhys
- Nengo (neural simulator)

International conferences on Python and scientific data include the following:

- PyData
- SciPy
- EuroSciPy

```
Python and Scientific Areas | 499
```

### Coming Up

We’ve reached the end of our observable Python universe, except for the multiverse

appendices.

### Things to Do

22.1 Install Pandas. Get the CSV file in Example 16-1. Run the program in

Example 16-2. Experiment with some of the Pandas commands.

**500 | Chapter 22: Py Sci**
