---
layout: default
title: 2장 Data-Types, Values, Variables, and Names
parent: Basic
grand_parent: Python
nav_order: 2
---

# {{ page.title }}
{: .no_toc }

## Table of contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta }

1. TOC
{:toc}


- 2. Data: Types, Values, Variables, and Names.
   - Python Data Are Objects
   - Types
   - Mutability
   - Literal Values
   - Variables
   - Assignment
   - Variables Are Names, Not Places
   - Assigning to Multiple Names
   - Reassigning a Name
   - Copying
   - Choose Good Variable Names
   - Coming Up
   - Things to Do


**CHAPTER 2**
**Data: Types, Values, Variables, and Names**

```
A good name is rather to be chosen than great riches.
—Proverbs 22:1
```
Under the hood, everything in your computer is just a sequence of bits (see Appen‐

dix A). One of the insights of computing is that we can interpret those bits any way

we want—as data of various sizes and types (numbers, text characters) or even as

computer code itself. We use Python to define chunks of these bits for different pur‐

poses, and to get them to and from the CPU.

We begin with Python’s data types and the values that they can contain. Then we see

how to represent data as literal values and variables.

### Python Data Are Objects

You can visualize your computer’s memory as a long series of shelves. Each slot on

one of those memory shelves is one byte wide (eight bits), and slots are numbered

from 0 (the first) to the end. Modern computers have billions of bytes of memory

(gigabytes), so the shelves would fill a huge imaginary warehouse.

A Python program is given access to some of your computer’s memory by your oper‐

ating system. That memory is used for the code of the program itself, and the data

that it uses. The operating system ensures that the program cannot read or write

other memory locations without somehow getting permission.

Programs keep track of where (memory location) their bits are, and what (data type)

they are. To your computer, it’s all just bits. The same bits mean different things,

depending on what type we say they are. The same bit pattern might stand for the

integer 65 or the text character A.

```
Data: Types, Values, Variables, and Names | 23
```

Different types may use different numbers of bits. When you read about a “64-bit

machine,” this means that an integer uses 64 bits (8 bytes).

Some languages plunk and pluck these raw values in memory, keeping track of their

sizes and types. Instead of handling such raw data values directly, Python wraps each

data value—booleans, integers, floats, strings, even large data structures, functions,

and programs—in memory as an object. There’s a whole chapter (Chapter 10) on how

to define your own objects in Python. For now, we’re just talking about objects that

handle the basic built-in data types.

Using the memory shelves analogy, you can think of objects as variable-sized boxes

occupying spaces on those shelves, as shown in Figure 2-1. Python makes these object

boxes, puts them in empty spaces on the shelves, and removes them when they’re no

longer used.

Figure 2-1. An object is like a box; this one is an integer with value _7_

In Python, an object is a chunk of data that contains at least the following:

- A type that defines what it can do (see the next section)
- A unique id to distinguish it from other objects
- A value consistent with its type
- A reference count that tracks how often this object is used

Its id is like its location on the shelf, a unique identifier. Its type is like a factory stamp

on the box, saying what it can do. If a Python object is an integer, it has the type int,

and could (among other things, which you’ll see in Chapter 3) be added to another

int. If we picture the box as being made of clear plastic, we can see the value inside.

You’ll learn the use of the reference count a few sections from now, when we talk about

variables and names.

**24 | Chapter 2: Data: Types, Values, Variables, and Names**


### Types

Table 2-1 shows the basic data types in Python. The second column (Type) contains

the Python name of that type. The third column (Mutable?) indicates whether the

value can be changed after creation, which I explain more in the next section. Exam‐

ples shows one or more literal examples of that type. And the final column (Chapter)

points you to the chapter in this book with the most details on this type.

Table 2-1. Python’s basic data types

```
Name Type Mutable? Examples Chapter
Boolean bool no True, False Chapter 3
Integer int no 47 , 25000 , 25_000 Chapter 3
Floating point float no 3.14, 2.7e5 Chapter 3
Complex complex no 3j, 5 + 9j Chapter 22
Text string str no 'alas', "alack", '''a verse attack''' Chapter 5
List list yes ['Winken', 'Blinken', 'Nod'] Chapter 7
Tuple tuple no (2, 4, 8) Chapter 7
Bytes bytes no b'ab\xff' Chapter 12
ByteArray bytearray yes bytearray(...) Chapter 12
Set set yes set([3, 5, 7]) Chapter 8
Frozen set frozenset no frozenset(['Elsa', 'Otto']) Chapter 8
Dictionary dict yes {'game': 'bingo', 'dog': 'dingo', 'drum
mer': 'Ringo'}
```
```
Chapter 8
```
After the chapters on these basic data types, you’ll see how to make new types in

Chapter 10.

### Mutability

```
Nought may endure but Mutability.
```
```
—Percy Shelley
```
The type also determines whether the data value contained by the box can be changed

(mutable) or is constant (immutable). Think of an immutable object as a sealed box,

but with clear sides, like Figure 2-1; you can see the value but you can’t change it. By

the same analogy, a mutable object is like a box with a lid: not only can you see the

value inside, you can also change it; however, you can’t change its type.

Python is strongly typed, which means that the type of an object does not change,

even if its value is mutable (Figure 2-2).

##### 25


Figure 2-2. Strong typing does not mean push the keys harder

### Literal Values

There are two ways of specifying data values in Python:

- Literal
- Variable

In coming chapters, you’ll see the details on how to specify literal values for different

data types—integers are a sequence of digits, floats contain a decimal point, text

strings are surrounded by quotes, and so on. But, for the rest of this chapter, to avoid

calloused fingertips, our examples will use only short decimal integers and a Python

list or two. Decimal integers are just like integers in math: a sequence of digits from 0

to 9. There are a few extra integer details (like signs and nondecimal bases) that we

look at in Chapter 3.

### Variables

Now, we’ve arrived at a key concept in computing languages.

Python, like most computer languages, lets you define variables—names for values in

your computer’s memory that you want to use in a program.

**26 | Chapter 2: Data: Types, Values, Variables, and Names**


```
1 async and await are new in Python 3.7.
```
Python variable names have some rules:

- They can contain only these characters:

—Lowercase letters (a through z)

—Uppercase letters (A through Z)

—Digits ( 0 through 9 )

—Underscore (_)

- They are case-sensitive: thing, Thing, and THING are different names.
- They must begin with a letter or an underscore, not a digit.
- Names that begin with an underscore are treated specially (which you can read
    about in Chapter 9).
- They cannot be one of Python’s reserved words (also known as keywords).

The reserved words^1 are:

```
False await else import pass
None break except in raise
True class finally is return
and continue for lambda try
as def from nonlocal while
assert del global not with
async elif if or yield
```
Within a Python program, you can find the reserved words with

```
>>> help("keywords")
```
or:

```
>>> import keyword
>>> keyword.kwlist
```
These are valid names:

- a
- a1
- a_b_c___95
- _abc
- _1a

```
Variables | 27
```

These names, however, are not valid:

- 1
- 1a
- 1_
- name!
- another-name

### Assignment

In Python, you use = to assign a value to a variable.

```
We all learned in grade school arithmetic that = means equal to. So
why do many computer languages, including Python, use = for
assignment? One reason is that standard keyboards lack logical
alternatives such as a left arrow key, and = didn’t seem too confus‐
ing. Also, in computer programs you use assignment much more
than you test for equality.
```
Programs are not like algebra. When you learned math in school, you saw equations

like this:

```
y = x + 12
```
You would solve the equation by “plugging in” a value for x. If you gave x the value 5 ,

5 + 12 is 17 , so the value of y would be 17. Plug in 6 for x to get 18 for y, and so on.

Computer program lines may look like equations, but their meaning is different. In

Python and other computer languages, x and y are variables. Python knows that a

bare sequence of digits like 12 or 5 is a literal integer. So here’s a tiny Python program

that mimics this equation, printing the resulting value of y:

```
>>> x = 5
>>> y = x + 12
>>> y
17
```
Here’s the big difference between math and programs: in math, = means equality of

both sides, but in programs it means assignment: assign the value on the right side to

the variable on the left side.

Also in programs, everything on the right side needs to have a value (this is called

being initialized). The right side can be a literal value, or a variable that has already

been assigned a value, or a combination. Python knows that 5 and 12 are literal

**28 | Chapter 2: Data: Types, Values, Variables, and Names**


integers. The first line assigns the integer value 5 to the variable x. Now we can use

the variable x in the next line. When Python reads y = x + 12, it does the following:

- Sees the = in the middle
- Knows that this is an assignment
- Calculates the right side (gets the value of the object referred to by x and adds it
    to 12 )
- Assigns the result to the left-side variable, y

Then typing the name of the variable y (in the interactive interpreter) will print its

new value.

If you started your program with the line y = x + 12, Python would generate an

exception (an error), because the variable x doesn’t have a value yet:

```
>>> y = x + 12
Traceback (most recent call last):
File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
NameError: name 'x' is not defined
```
You’ll get the full rundown on exceptions in Chapter 9. In computerese, we’d say that

this x was uninitialized.

In algebra, you can work backward, and assign a value to y to calculate x. To do this

in Python, you’d need to get the literal values and initialized variables on the right

side before assigning to x on the left:

```
>>> y = 5
>>> x = 12 - y
>>> x
7
```
### Variables Are Names, Not Places

Now it’s time to make a crucial point about variables in Python: variables are just

names. This is different from many other computer languages, and a key thing to

know about Python, especially when we get to mutable objects like lists. Assignment

does not copy a value; it just attaches a name to the object that contains the data. The

name is a reference to a thing rather than the thing itself. Visualize a name as a tag

with a string attached to the object box somewhere else in the computer’s memory

(Figure 2-3).

```
Variables Are Names, Not Places | 29
```

Figure 2-3. Names point to objects (variable _a_ points to an integer object with value _7_ )

In other languages, the variable itself has a type, and binds to a memory location. You

can change the value at that location, but it needs to be of the same type. This is why

static languages make you declare the types of variables. Python doesn’t, because a

name can refer to anything, and we get the value and type by “following the string” to

the data object itself. This saves time, but there are some downsides:

- You may misspell a variable and get an exception because it doesn’t refer to any‐
    thing, and Python doesn’t automatically check this as static languages do. Chap‐
    ter 19 shows ways of checking your variables ahead of time to avoid this.
- Python’s raw speed is slower than a language like C. It makes the computer do
    more work so you don’t have to.

Try this with the interactive interpreter (visualized in Figure 2-4):

1. As before, assign the value 7 to the name a. This creates an object box containing
    the integer value 7.
2. Print the value of a.
3. Assign a to b, making b also point to the object box containing 7.
4. Print the value of b:

```
>>> a = 7
>>> print (a)
7
>>> b = a
```
**30 | Chapter 2: Data: Types, Values, Variables, and Names**


```
>>> print (b)
7
```
Figure 2-4. Copying a name (now variable _b_ also points to the same integer object)

In Python, if you want to know the type of anything (a variable or a literal value), you

can use type( _thing_ ). type() is one of Python’s built-in functions. If you want to

check whether a variable points to an object of a specific type, use isinstance( _type_ ):

```
>>> type(7)
<class 'int'>
>>> type(7) == int
True
>>> isinstance(7, int)
True
```
```
When I mention a function, I’ll put parentheses (()) after it to
emphasize that it’s a function rather than a variable name or some‐
thing else.
```
Let’s try it with more literal values ( 58 , 99.9, 'abc') and variables (a, b):

```
>>> a = 7
>>> b = a
>>> type(a)
<class 'int'>
>>> type(b)
<class 'int'>
>>> type(58)
```
```
Variables Are Names, Not Places | 31
```

```
2 Or the Island of Misfit Objects.
```
```
<class 'int'>
>>> type(99.9)
<class 'float'>
>>> type('abc')
<class 'str'>
```
A class is the definition of an object; Chapter 10 covers classes in greater detail. In

Python, “class” and “type” mean pretty much the same thing.

As you’ve seen, when you use a variable in Python, it looks up the object that it refers

to. Behind the scenes, Python is busy, often creating temporary objects that will be

discarded a line or two later.

Let’s repeat an earlier example:

```
>>> y = 5
>>> x = 12 - y
>>> x
7
```
In this code snippet, Python did the following:

- Created an integer object with the value 5
- Made a variable y point to that 5 object
- Incremented the reference count of the object with value 5
- Created another integer object with the value 12
- Subtracted the value of the object that y points to ( 5 ) from the value 12 in the
    (anonymous) object with that value
- Assigned this value ( 7 ) to a new (so far, unnamed) integer object
- Made the variable x point to this new object
- Incremented the reference count of this new object that x points to
- Looked up the value of the object that x points to ( 7 ) and printed it

When an object’s reference count reaches zero, no names are pointing to it, so it

doesn’t need to stick around. Python has a charmingly named garbage collector that

reuses the memory of things that are no longer needed. Picture someone behind

those memory shelves, yanking obsolete boxes for recycling.

In this case, we no longer need the objects with the values 5 , 12 , or 7 , or the variables

x and y. The Python garbage collector may choose to send them to object heaven,^2 or

**32 | Chapter 2: Data: Types, Values, Variables, and Names**


keep some around for performance reasons given that small integers tend to be used

a lot.

### Assigning to Multiple Names

You can assign a value to more than one variable name at the same time:

```
>>> two = deux = zwei = 2
>>> two
2
>>> deux
2
>>> zwei
2
```
### Reassigning a Name

Because names point to objects, changing the value assigned to a name just makes the

name point to a new object. The reference count of the old object is decremented, and

the new one’s is incremented.

### Copying

As you saw in Figure 2-4, assigning an existing variable a to a new variable named b

just makes b point to the same object that a does. If you pick up either the a or b tag

and follow their strings, you’ll get to the same object.

If the object is immutable (like an integer), its value can’t be changed, so both names

are essentially read-only. Try this:

```
>>> x = 5
>>> x
5
>>> y = x
>>> y
5
>>> x = 29
>>> x
29
>>> y
5
```
When we assigned x to y, that made the name y point to the integer object with value

5 that x was also pointing to. Changing x made it point to a new integer object with

value 29. It did not change the one containing 5 , which y still points to.

```
Assigning to Multiple Names | 33
```

But if both names point to a mutable object, you can change the object’s value via

either name, and you’ll see the changed value when you use either name. If you didn’t

know this first, it could surprise you.

A list is a mutable array of values, and Chapter 7 covers them in gruesome detail. For

this example, a and b each point to a list with three integer members:

```
>>> a = [2, 4, 6]
>>> b = a
>>> a
[2, 4, 6]
>>> b
[2, 4, 6]
```
These list members (a[0], a[1], and a[2]) are themselves like names, pointing to

integer objects with the values 2 , 4 , and 6. The list object keeps its members in order.

Now change the first list element, through the name a, and see that b also changed:

```
>>> a[0] = 99
>>> a
[99, 4, 6]
>>> b
[99, 4, 6]
```
When the first list element is changed, it no longer points to the object with value 2 ,

but a new object with value 99. The list is still of type list, but its value (the list ele‐

ments and their order) is mutable.

### Choose Good Variable Names

```
He said true things, but called them by wrong names.
—Elizabeth Barrett Browning
```
It’s surprising how important it is to choose good names for your variables. In many

of the code examples so far, I’ve been using throwaway names like a and x. In real

programs, you’ll have many more variables to keep track of at once, and you’ll need

to balance brevity and clarity. For example, it’s faster to type num_loons rather than

number_of_loons or gaviidae_inventory, but it’s more explanatory than n.

**34 | Chapter 2: Data: Types, Values, Variables, and Names**


```
38 looks like a snowman!
```
### Coming Up

Numbers! They’re as exciting as you expect. Well, maybe not that bad.^3 You’ll see how

to use Python as a calculator and how a cat founded a digital system.

### Things to Do

2.1 Assign the integer value 99 to the variable prince, and print it.

2.2 What type is the value 5?

2.3 What type is the value 2.0?

2.4 What type is the expression 5 + 2.0?