---
layout: default
title: 3장 Numbers
parent: Basic
grand_parent: Python
nav_order: 3
---

# {{ page.title }}
{: .no_toc }

## Table of contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta }

1. TOC
{:toc}

- 3. Numbers.
   - Booleans
   - Integers
      - Literal Integers
      - Integer Operations
      - Integers and Variables
      - Precedence
      - Bases
      - Type Conversions
      - How Big Is an int?
   - Floats
   - Math Functions
   - Coming Up
   - Things to Do


**CHAPTER 3**
**Numbers**

```
That action is best which procures the greatest happiness for the greatest numbers.
—Francis Hutcheson
```
In this chapter we begin by looking at Python’s simplest built-in data types:

- Booleans (which have the value True or False)
- Integers (whole numbers such as 42 and 100000000 )
- Floats (numbers with decimal points such as 3.14159, or sometimes exponents
    like 1.0e8, which means one times ten to the eighth power, or 100000000.0)

In a way, they’re like atoms. We use them individually in this chapter, and in later

chapters you’ll see how to combine them into larger “molecules” like lists and

dictionaries.

Each type has specific rules for its usage and is handled differently by the computer. I

also show how to use literal values like 97 and 3.1416, and the variables that I men‐

tioned in Chapter 2.

The code examples in this chapter are all valid Python, but they’re snippets. We’ll be

using the Python interactive interpreter, typing these snippets and seeing the results

immediately. Try running them yourself with the version of Python on your com‐

puter. You’ll recognize these examples by the >>> prompt.

```
Numbers | 37
```

### Booleans

In Python, the only values for the boolean data type are True and False. Sometimes,

you’ll use these directly; other times you’ll evaluate the “truthiness” of other types

from their values. The special Python function bool() can convert any Python data

type to a boolean.

Functions get their own chapter in Chapter 9, but for now you just need to know that

a function has a name, zero or more comma-separated input arguments surrounded

by parentheses, and zero or more return values. The bool() function takes any value

as its argument and returns the boolean equivalent.

Nonzero numbers are considered True:

```
>>> bool(True)
True
>>> bool(1)
True
>>> bool(45)
True
>>> bool(-45)
True
```
And zero-valued ones are considered False:

```
>>> bool(False)
False
>>> bool(0)
False
>>> bool(0.0)
False
```
You’ll see the usefulness of booleans in Chapter 4. In later chapters, you’ll see how

lists, dictionaries, and other types can be considered True or False.

### Integers

Integers are whole numbers—no fractions, no decimal points, nothing fancy. Well,

aside from a possible initial sign. And bases, if you want to express numbers in other

ways than the usual decimal (base 10).

#### Literal Integers

Any sequence of digits in Python represents a literal integer:

```
>>> 5
5
```
```
38
```
**38 | Chapter 3: Numbers**


```
1 For Python 3.6 and newer.
```
A plain zero ( 0 ) is valid:

```
>>> 0
0
```
But you can’t have an initial 0 followed by a digit between 1 and 9 :

```
>>> 05
File "<stdin>", line 1
05
^
SyntaxError: invalid token
```
```
This Python exception warns that you typed something that breaks
Python’s rules. I explain what this means in “Bases” on page 44.
You’ll see many more examples of exceptions in this book because
they’re Python’s main error handling mechanism.
```
You can start an integer with 0b, 0o, or 0x. See “Bases” on page 44.

A sequence of digits specifies a positive integer. If you put a + sign before the digits,

the number stays the same:

```
>>> 123
123
>>> +123
123
```
To specify a negative integer, insert a – before the digits:

```
>>> -123
-123
```
You can’t have any commas in the integer:

```
>>> 1,000,000
(1, 0, 0)
```
Instead of a million, you’d get a tuple (see Chapter 7 for more information on tuples)

with three values. But you can use the underscore (_) character as a digit separator:^1

```
>>> million = 1_000_000
>>> million
1000000
```
```
Integers | 39
```

Actually, you can put underscores anywhere after the first digit; they’re just ignored:

```
>>> 1_2_3
123
```
#### Integer Operations

For the next few pages, I show examples of Python acting as a simple calculator. You

can do normal arithmetic with Python by using the math operators in this table:

```
Operator Description Example Result
+ Addition 5 + 8 13
```
- Subtraction 90 - 10 80
* Multiplication 4 * 7 28
/ Floating-point division 7 / 2 3.5
// Integer (truncating) division 7 // 2 3
% Modulus (remainder) 7 % 3 1
** Exponentiation 3 ** 4 81

Addition and subtraction work as you’d expect:

```
>>> 5 + 9
14
>>> 100 - 7
93
>>> 4 - 10
-6
```
You can include as many numbers and operators as you’d like:

```
>>> 5 + 9 + 3
17
>>> 4 + 3 - 2 - 1 + 6
10
```
Note that you’re not required to have a space between each number and operator:

```
>>> 5+9 + 3
17
```
It just looks better stylewise and is easier to read.

Multiplication is also straightforward:

```
>>> 6 * 7
42
>>> 7 * 6
42
```
**40 | Chapter 3: Numbers**


##### >>> 6 * 7 * 2 * 3

##### 252

Division is a little more interesting because it comes in two flavors:

- / carries out floating-point (decimal) division
- // performs integer (truncating) division

Even if you’re dividing an integer by an integer, using a / will give you a floating-

point result (floats are coming later in this chapter):

```
>>> 9 / 5
1.8
```
Truncating integer division returns an integer answer, throwing away any remainder:

```
>>> 9 // 5
1
```
Instead of tearing a hole in the space-time continuum, dividing by zero with either

kind of division causes a Python exception:

```
>>> 5 / 0
Traceback (most recent call last):
File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
ZeroDivisionError: division by zero
>>> 7 // 0
Traceback (most recent call last):
File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
ZeroDivisionError: integer division or modulo by z
```
#### Integers and Variables

All of the preceding examples used literal integers. You can mix literal integers and

variables that have been assigned integer values:

```
>>> a = 95
>>> a
95
>>> a - 3
92
```
You’ll remember from Chapter 2 that a is a name that points to an integer object.

When I said a - 3, I didn’t assign the result back to a, so the value of a did not

change:

```
>>> a
95
```
```
Integers | 41
```

If you wanted to change a, you would do this:

```
>>> a = a - 3
>>> a
92
```
Again, this would not be a legal math equation, but it’s how you reassign a value to a

variable in Python. In Python, the expression on the right side of the = is calculated

first, and then assigned to the variable on the left side.

If it helps, think of it this way:

- Subtract 3 from a
- Assign the result of that subtraction to a temporary variable
- Assign the value of the temporary variable to a:

```
>>> a = 95
>>> temp = a - 3
>>> a = temp
```
So, when you say

```
>>> a = a - 3
```
Python is calculating the subtraction on the righthand side, remembering the result,

and then assigning it to a on the left side of the + sign. It’s faster and neater than using

a temporary variable.

You can combine the arithmetic operators with assignment by putting the operator

before the =. Here, a -= 3 is like saying a = a - 3:

```
>>> a = 95
>>> a -= 3
>>> a
92
```
This is like a = a + 8:

```
>>> a = 92
>>> a += 8
>>> a
100
```
And this is like a = a * 2:

```
>>> a = 100
>>> a *= 2
>>> a
200
```
**42 | Chapter 3: Numbers**


Here’s a floating-point division example, like a = a / 3:

```
>>> a = 200
>>> a /= 3
>>> a
66.66666666666667
```
Now let’s try the shorthand for a = a // 4 (truncating integer division):

```
>>> a = 13
>>> a //= 4
>>> a
3
```
The % character has multiple uses in Python. When it’s between two numbers, it pro‐

duces the remainder when the first number is divided by the second:

```
>>> 9 % 5
4
```
Here’s how to get both the (truncated) quotient and remainder at once:

```
>>> divmod(9,5)
(1, 4)
```
Otherwise, you could have calculated them separately:

```
>>> 9 // 5
1
>>> 9 % 5
4
```
You just saw some new things here: a function named divmod is given the integers 9

and 5 and returns a two-item tuple. As I mentioned earlier, tuples will take a bow in

Chapter 7; functions debut in Chapter 9.

One last math feature is exponentiation with **, which also lets you mix integers and

floats:

```
>>> 2**3
8
>>> 2.0 ** 3
8.0
>>> 2 ** 3.0
8.0
>>> 0 ** 3
0
```
#### Precedence

What would you get if you typed the following?

```
>>> 2 + 3 * 4
```
```
Integers | 43
```

If you do the addition first, 2 + 3 is 5 , and 5 * 4 is 20. But if you do the multiplica‐

tion first, 3 * 4 is 12 , and 2 + 12 is 14. In Python, as in most languages, multiplica‐

tion has higher precedence than addition, so the second version is what you’d see:

```
>>> 2 + 3 * 4
14
```
How do you know the precedence rules? There’s a big table in Appendix E that lists

them all, but I’ve found that in practice I never look up these rules. It’s much easier to

just add parentheses to group your code as you intend the calculation to be carried

out:

```
>>> 2 + (3 * 4)
14
```
This example with exponents

```
>>> -5 ** 2
-25
```
is the same as

```
>>> - (5 ** 2)
-25
```
and probably not what you wanted. Parentheses make it clear:

```
>>> (-5) ** 2
25
```
This way, anyone reading the code doesn’t need to guess its intent or look up prece‐

dence rules.

#### Bases

Integers are assumed to be decimal (base 10) unless you use a prefix to specify

another base. You might never need to use these other bases, but you’ll probably see

them in Python code somewhere, sometime.

We generally have 10 fingers and 10 toes, so we count 0 , 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9. Next,

we run out of single digits and carry the one to the “ten’s place” and put a 0 in the

one’s place: 10 means “1 ten and 0 ones.” Unlike Roman numerals, Arabic numbers

don’t have a single character that represents “10” Then, it’s 11 , 12 , up to 19 , carry the

one to make 20 (2 tens and 0 ones), and so on.

A base is how many digits you can use until you need to “carry the one.” In base 2

(binary), the only digits are 0 and 1. This is the famous bit. 0 is the same as a plain

old decimal 0, and 1 is the same as a decimal 1. However, in base 2, if you add a 1 to a

1 , you get 10 (1 decimal two plus 0 decimal ones).

**44 | Chapter 3: Numbers**


In Python, you can express literal integers in three bases besides decimal with these

integer prefixes:

- 0b or 0B for binary (base 2).
- 0o or 0O for octal (base 8).
- 0x or 0X for hex (base 16).

These bases are all powers of two, and are handy in some cases, although you may

never need to use anything other than good old decimal integers.

The interpreter prints these for you as decimal integers. Let’s try each of these bases.

First, a plain old decimal 10 , which means 1 ten and 0 ones:

```
>>> 10
10
```
Now, a binary (base two) 0b10, which means 1 (decimal) two and 0 ones:

```
>>> 0b10
2
```
Octal (base 8) 0o10 stands for 1 (decimal) eight and 0 ones:

```
>>> 0o10
8
```
Hexadecimal (base 16) 0x10 means 1 (decimal) sixteen and 0 ones:

```
>>> 0x10
16
```
You can go the other direction, converting an integer to a string with any of these

bases:

```
>>> value = 65
>>> bin(value)
'0b1000001'
>>> oct(value)
'0o101'
>>> hex(value)
'0x41'
```
The chr() function converts an integer to its single-character string equivalent:

```
>>> chr(65)
'A'
```
And ord() goes the other way:

```
>>> ord('A')
65
```
```
Integers | 45
```

In case you’re wondering what “digits” base 16 uses, they are: 0 , 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 , 8 , 9 ,

a, b, c, d, e, and f. 0xa is a decimal 10 , and 0xf is a decimal 15. Add 1 to 0xf and you

get 0x10 (decimal 16).

Why use different bases from 10? They’re useful in bit-level operations, which are

described in Chapter 12, along with more details about converting numbers from one

base to another.

Cats normally have five digits on each forepaw and four on each hindpaw, for a total

of 18. If you ever encounter cat scientists in their lab coats, they’re often discussing

base-18 arithmetic. My cat Chester, seen lounging about in Figure 3-1, is a polydactyl,

giving him a total of 22 or so (they’re hard to distinguish) toes. If he wanted to use all

of them to count food fragments surrounding his bowl, he would likely use a base-22

system (hereafter, the chesterdigital system), using 0 through 9 and a through l.

Figure 3-1. Chester—a fine furry fellow, and inventor of the chesterdigital system

**46 | Chapter 3: Numbers**


#### Type Conversions

To change other Python data types to an integer, use the int() function.

The int() function takes one input argument and returns one value, the integer-ized

equivalent of the input argument. This will keep the whole number and discard any

fractional part.

As you saw at the start of this chapter, Python’s simplest data type is the boolean,

which has only the values True and False. When converted to integers, they repre‐

sent the values 1 and 0 :

```
>>> int(True)
1
>>> int(False)
0
```
Turning this around, the bool() function returns the boolean equivalent of an

integer:

```
>>> bool(1)
True
>>> bool(0)
False
```
Converting a floating-point number to an integer just lops off everything after the

decimal point:

```
>>> int(98.6)
98
>>> int(1.0e4)
10000
```
Converting a float to a boolean is no surprise:

```
>>> bool(1.0)
True
>>> bool(0.0)
False
```
Finally, here’s an example of getting the integer value from a text string (Chapter 5)

that contains only digits, possibly with _ digit separators or an initial + or - sign:

```
>>> int('99')
99
>>> int('-23')
-23
>>> int('+12')
12
>>> int('1_000_000')
1000000
```
```
Integers | 47
```

If the string represents a nondecimal integer, you can include the base:

```
>>> int('10', 2) # binary
2
>>> int('10', 8) # octal
8
>>> int('10', 16) # hexadecimal
16
>>> int('10', 22) # chesterdigital
22
```
Converting an integer to an integer doesn’t change anything, but doesn’t hurt either:

```
>>> int(12345)
12345
```
If you try to convert something that doesn’t look like a number, you’ll get an

exception:

```
>>> int('99 bottles of beer on the wall')
Traceback (most recent call last):
File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
ValueError: invalid literal for int() with base 10: '99 bottles of beer on the wall'
>>> int('')
Traceback (most recent call last):
File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
ValueError: invalid literal for int() with base 10: ''
```
The preceding text string started with valid digit characters ( 99 ), but it kept on going

with others that the int() function just wouldn’t stand for.

int() will make integers from floats or strings of digits, but it won’t handle strings

containing decimal points or exponents:

```
>>> int('98.6')
Traceback (most recent call last):
File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
ValueError: invalid literal for int() with base 10: '98.6'
>>> int('1.0e4')
Traceback (most recent call last):
File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
ValueError: invalid literal for int() with base 10: '1.0e4'
```
If you mix numeric types, Python will sometimes try to automatically convert them

for you:

```
>>> 4 + 7.0
11.0
```
The boolean value False is treated as 0 or 0.0 when mixed with integers or floats,

and True is treated as 1 or 1.0:

```
>>> True + 2
3
```
**48 | Chapter 3: Numbers**


```
>>> False + 5.0
5.0
```
#### How Big Is an int?

In Python 2, the size of an int could be limited to 32 or 64 bits, depending on your

CPU; 32 bits can store store any integer from –2,147,483,648 to 2,147,483,647.

A long had 64 bits, allowing values from –9,223,372,036,854,775,808 to

9,223,372,036,854,775,807. In Python 3, the long type is long gone, and an int can be

any size—even greater than 64 bits. You can play with big numbers like a googol (one

followed by a hundred zeroes, named in 1920 by a nine-year-old boy):

```
>>>
>>> googol = 10**100
>>> googol
100000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
00000000000000000000000
>>> googol * googol
100000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
```
A googolplex is 10**googol (a thousand zeroes, if you want to try it yourself ). This

was a suggested name for Google before they decided on googol, but didn’t check its

spelling before registering the domain name google.com.

In many languages, trying this would cause something called integer overflow, where

the number would need more space than the computer allowed for it, with various

bad effects. Python handles googoly integers with no problem.

### Floats

Integers are whole numbers, but floating-point numbers (called floats in Python) have

decimal points:

```
>>> 5.
5.0
>>> 5.0
5.0
>>> 05.0
5.0
```
Floats can include a decimal integer exponent after the letter e:

```
>>> 5e0
5.0
>>> 5e1
50.0
>>> 5.0e1
```
```
Floats | 49
```

##### 50.0

##### >>> 5.0 * (10 ** 1)

##### 50.0

You can use underscore (_) to separate digits for clarity, as you can for integers:

```
>>> million = 1_000_000.0
>>> million
1000000.0
>>> 1.0_0_1
1.001
```
Floats are handled similarly to integers: you can use the operators (+, –, *, /, //, **,

and %) and the divmod() function.

To convert other types to floats, you use the float() function. As before, booleans act

like tiny integers:

```
>>> float(True)
1.0
>>> float(False)
0.0
```
Converting an integer to a float just makes it the proud possessor of a decimal point:

```
>>> float(98)
98.0
>>> float('99')
99.0
```
And you can convert a string containing characters that would be a valid float (digits,

signs, decimal point, or an e followed by an exponent) to a real float:

```
>>> float('98.6')
98.6
>>> float('-1.5')
-1.5
>>> float('1.0e4')
10000.0
```
When you mix integers and floats, Python automatically promotes the integer values

to float values:

```
>>> 43 + 2.
45.0
```
Python also promotes booleans to integers or floats:

```
>>> False + 0
0
>>> False + 0.
0.0
>>> True + 0
1
```
**50 | Chapter 3: Numbers**


```
>>> True + 0.
1.0
```
### Math Functions

Python supports complex numbers and has the usual math functions such as square

roots, cosines, and so on. Let’s save them for Chapter 22, in which we also discuss

using Python in science contexts.

### Coming Up

In the next chapter, you finally graduate from one-line Python examples. With the if

statement, you’ll learn how to make decisions with code.

### Things to Do

This chapter introduced the atoms of Python: numbers, booleans, and variables. Let’s

try a few small exercises with them in the interactive interpreter.

3.1 How many seconds are in an hour? Use the interactive interpreter as a calculator

and multiply the number of seconds in a minute ( 60 ) by the number of minutes in an

hour (also 60 ).

3.2 Assign the result from the previous task (seconds in an hour) to a variable called

seconds_per_hour.

3.3 How many seconds are in a day? Use your seconds_per_hour variable.

3.4 Calculate seconds per day again, but this time save the result in a variable called

seconds_per_day.

3.5 Divide seconds_per_day by seconds_per_hour. Use floating-point (/) division.

3.6 Divide seconds_per_day by seconds_per_hour, using integer (//) division. Did

this number agree with the floating-point value from the previous question, aside

from the final .0?
