---
layout: default
title: 5장 Text Strings
parent: Basic
grand_parent: Python
nav_order: 5
---

# {{ page.title }}
{: .no_toc }

## Table of contents
{: .no_toc .text-delta }

1. TOC
{:toc}

Computer books often give the impression that programming is all about math.

Actually, most programmers work with strings of text more often than numbers. Log‐

ical (and creative!) thinking is often more important than math skills.

Strings are our first example of a Python sequence. In this case, they’re a sequence of

characters. But what’s a character? It’s the smallest unit in a writing system, and

includes letters, digits, symbols, punctuation, and even white space or directives like

linefeeds. A character is defined by its meaning (how it’s used), not how it looks. It

can have more than one visual representation (in different fonts), and more than one

character can have the same appearance (such as the visual H, which means the H

sound in the Latin alphabet but the Latin N sound in Cyrillic).

This chapter concentrates on how to make and format simple text strings, using

ASCII (basic character set) examples. Two important text topics are deferred to

Chapter 12: Unicode characters (like the H and N issue I just mentioned) and regular

expressions (pattern matching).

Unlike other languages, strings in Python are immutable. You can’t change a string in

place, but you can copy parts of strings to another string to get the same effect. We

look at how to do this shortly.

##### 63


### Create with Quotes

You make a Python string by enclosing characters in matching single or double

quotes:

```
>>> 'Snap'
'Snap'
>>> "Crackle"
'Crackle'
```
The interactive interpreter echoes strings with a single quote, but all are treated

exactly the same by Python.

```
Python has a few special types of strings, indicated by a letter
before the first quote. f or F starts an f string, used for formatting,
and described near the end of this chapter. r or R starts a raw string,
used to prevent escape sequences in the string (see “Escape with \”
on page 66 and Chapter 12 for its use in string pattern matching).
Then, there’s the combination fr (or FR, Fr, or fR) that starts a raw
f-string. A u starts a Unicode string, which is the same as a plain
string. And a b starts a value of type bytes (Chapter 12). Unless I
mention one of these special types, I’m always talking about plain
old Python Unicode text strings.
```
Why have two kinds of quote characters? The main purpose is to create strings con‐

taining quote characters. You can have single quotes inside double-quoted strings, or

double quotes inside single-quoted strings:

```
>>> "'Nay!' said the naysayer. 'Neigh?' said the horse."
"'Nay!' said the naysayer. 'Neigh?' said the horse."
>>> 'The rare double quote in captivity: ".'
'The rare double quote in captivity: ".'
>>> 'A "two by four" is actually 1 1⁄2" × 3 1⁄2".'
'A "two by four" is actually 1 1⁄2" × 3 1⁄2".'
>>> "'There's the man that shot my paw!' cried the limping hound."
"'There's the man that shot my paw!' cried the limping hound."
```
You can also use three single quotes (''') or three double quotes ("""):

```
>>> '''Boom!'''
'Boom'
>>> """Eek!"""
'Eek!'
```
Triple quotes aren’t very useful for short strings like these. Their most common use is

to create multiline strings, like this classic poem from Edward Lear:

```
>>> poem = '''There was a Young Lady of Norway,
... Who casually sat in a doorway;
... When the door squeezed her flat,
```
**64 | Chapter 5: Text Strings**


```
... She exclaimed, "What of that?"
... This courageous Young Lady of Norway.'''
>>>
```
(This was entered in the interactive interpreter, which prompted us with >>> for the

first line and continuation prompts ... until we entered the final triple quotes and

went to the next line.)

If you tried to create that poem without triple quotes, Python would make a fuss

when you went to the second line:

```
>>> poem = 'There was a young lady of Norway,
File "<stdin>", line 1
poem = 'There was a young lady of Norway,
^
SyntaxError: EOL while scanning string literal
>>>
```
If you have multiple lines within triple quotes, the line ending characters will be pre‐

served in the string. If you have leading or trailing spaces, they’ll also be kept:

```
>>> poem2 = '''I do not like thee, Doctor Fell.
... The reason why, I cannot tell.
... But this I know, and know full well:
... I do not like thee, Doctor Fell.
... '''
>>> print (poem2)
I do not like thee, Doctor Fell.
The reason why, I cannot tell.
But this I know, and know full well:
I do not like thee, Doctor Fell.
```
##### >>>

By the way, there’s a difference between the output of print() and the automatic

echoing done by the interactive interpreter:

```
>>> poem2
'I do not like thee, Doctor Fell.\n The reason why, I cannot tell.\n But
this I know, and know full well:\n I do not like thee, Doctor Fell.\n'
```
print() strips quotes from strings and prints their contents. It’s meant for human

output. It helpfully adds a space between each of the things it prints, and a newline at

the end:

```
>>> print ('Give', "us", '''some''', """space""")
Give us some space
```
If you don’t want the space or newline, Chapter 14 explains how to avoid them.

The interactive interpreter prints the string with individual quotes and escape charac‐

ters such as \n, which are explained in “Escape with \” on page 66.

```
Create with Quotes | 65
```

```
>>> """'Guten Morgen, mein Herr!'
... said mad king Ludwig to his wig."""
"'Guten Morgen, mein Herr!'\nsaid mad king Ludwig to his wig."
```
Finally, there is the empty string, which has no characters at all but is perfectly valid.

You can create an empty string with any of the aforementioned quotes:

```
>>> ''
''
>>> ""
''
>>> ''''''
''
>>> """"""
''
>>>
```
### Create with str()

You can make a string from another data type by using the str() function:

```
>>> str(98.6)
'98.6'
>>> str(1.0e4)
'10000.0'
>>> str(True)
'True'
```
Python uses the str() function internally when you call print() with objects that are

not strings and when doing string formatting, which you’ll see later in this chapter.

### Escape with \

Python lets you escape the meaning of some characters within strings to achieve

effects that would otherwise be difficult to express. By preceding a character with a

backslash (\), you give it a special meaning. The most common escape sequence is \n,

which means to begin a new line. With this you can create multiline strings from a

one-line string:

```
>>> palindrome = 'A man, \n A plan, \n A canal: \n Panama.'
>>> print (palindrome)
A man,
A plan,
A canal:
Panama.
```
You will see the escape sequence \t (tab) used to align text:

```
>>> print (' \t abc')
abc
>>> print ('a \t bc')
```
**66 | Chapter 5: Text Strings**


```
a bc
>>> print ('ab \t c')
ab c
>>> print ('abc \t ')
abc
```
(The final string has a terminating tab which, of course, you can’t see.)

You might also need \' or \" to specify a literal single or double quote inside a string

that’s quoted by the same character:

```
>>> testimony = " \" I did nothing! \" he said. \" Or that other thing. \" "
>>> testimony
'"I did nothing!" he said. "Or that other thing."'
>>> print (testimony)
"I did nothing!" he said. "Or that other thing."
```
```
>>> fact = "The world's largest rubber duck was 54'2 \" by 65'7 \" by 105'"
>>> print (fact)
The world's largest rubber duck was 54'2" by 65'7" by 105'
```
And if you need a literal backslash, type two of them (the first escapes the second):

```
>>> speech = 'The backslash ( \\ ) bends over backwards to please you.'
>>> print (speech)
The backslash (\) bends over backwards to please you.
>>>
```
As I mentioned early in this chapter, a raw string negates these escapes:

```
>>> info = r'Type a \n to get a new line in a normal string'
>>> info
'Type a \\n to get a new line in a normal string'
>>> print (info)
Type a \n to get a new line in a normal string
```
(The extra backslash in the first info output was added by the interactive interpreter.)

A raw string does not undo any real (not '\n') newlines:

```
>>> poem = r'''Boys and girls, come out to play.
... The moon doth shine as bright as day.'''
>>> poem
'Boys and girls, come out to play.\nThe moon doth shine as bright as day.'
>>> print (poem)
Boys and girls, come out to play.
The moon doth shine as bright as day.
```
##### | 67


### Combine by Using +

You can combine literal strings or string variables in Python by using the + operator:

```
>>> 'Release the kraken! ' + 'No, wait!'
'Release the kraken! No, wait!'
```
You can also combine literal strings (not string variables) just by having one after the

other:

```
>>> "My word! " "A gentleman caller!"
'My word! A gentleman caller!'
>>> "Alas! ""The kraken!"
'Alas! The kraken!'
```
If you have a lot of these, you can avoid escaping the line endings by surrounding

them with parentheses:

```
>>> vowels = ( 'a'
... "e" '''i'''
... 'o' """u"""
... )
>>> vowels
'aeiou'
```
Python does not add spaces for you when concatenating strings, so in some earlier

examples, we needed to include spaces explicitly. Python does add a space between

each argument to a print() statement and a newline at the end.

```
>>> a = 'Duck.'
>>> b = a
>>> c = 'Grey Duck!'
>>> a + b + c
'Duck.Duck.Grey Duck!'
>>> print (a, b, c)
Duck. Duck. Grey Duck!
```
### Duplicate with *

You use the * operator to duplicate a string. Try typing these lines into your interac‐

tive interpreter and see what they print:

```
>>> start = 'Na ' * 4 + ' \n '
>>> middle = 'Hey ' * 3 + ' \n '
>>> end = 'Goodbye.'
>>> print (start + start + middle + end)
```
Notice that the * has higher precedence than +, so the string is duplicated before the

line feed is tacked on.

**68 | Chapter 5: Text Strings**


### Get a Character with []

To get a single character from a string, specify its offset inside square brackets after

the string’s name. The first (leftmost) offset is 0, the next is 1, and so on. The last

(rightmost) offset can be specified with –1, so you don’t have to count; going to the

left are –2, –3, and so on:

```
>>> letters = 'abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz'
>>> letters[0]
'a'
>>> letters[1]
'b'
>>> letters[-1]
'z'
>>> letters[-2]
'y'
>>> letters[25]
'z'
>>> letters[5]
'f'
```
If you specify an offset that is the length of the string or longer (remember, offsets go

from 0 to length–1), you’ll get an exception:

```
>>> letters[100]
Traceback (most recent call last):
File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
IndexError: string index out of range
```
Indexing works the same with the other sequence types (lists and tuples), which I

cover in Chapter 7.

Because strings are immutable, you can’t insert a character directly into one or change

the character at a specific index. Let’s try to change 'Henny' to 'Penny' and see what

happens:

```
>>> name = 'Henny'
>>> name[0] = 'P'
Traceback (most recent call last):
File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
TypeError: 'str' object does not support item assignment
```
Instead you need to use some combination of string functions such as replace() or a

slice (which we look at in a moment):

```
>>> name = 'Henny'
>>> name.replace('H', 'P')
'Penny'
>>> 'P' + name[1:]
'Penny'
```
```
Get a Character with [] | 69
```

We didn’t change the value of name. The interactive interpreter just printed the result

of the replacement.

### Get a Substring with a Slice

You can extract a substring (a part of a string) from a string by using a slice. You

define a slice by using square brackets, a _start_ offset, an _end_ offset, and an optional

_step_ count between them. You can omit some of these. The slice will include charac‐

ters from offset _start_ to one before _end_ :

- [:] extracts the entire sequence from start to end.
- [ _start_ :] specifies from the _start_ offset to the end.
- [: _end_ ] specifies from the beginning to the _end_ offset minus 1.
- [ _start_ : _end_ ] indicates from the _start_ offset to the _end_ offset minus 1.
- [ _start_ : _end_ : _step_ ] extracts from the _start_ offset to the _end_ offset minus 1,
    skipping characters by _step_.

As before, offsets go 0, 1, and so on from the start to the right, and –1,–2, and so forth

from the end to the left. If you don’t specify _start_ , the slice uses 0 (the beginning). If

you don’t specify _end_ , it uses the end of the string.

Let’s make a string of the lowercase English letters:

```
>>> letters = 'abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz'
```
Using a plain : is the same as 0: (the entire string):

```
>>> letters[:]
'abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz'
```
Here’s an example from offset 20 to the end:

```
>>> letters[20:]
'uvwxyz'
```
Now, from offset 10 to the end:

```
>>> letters[10:]
'klmnopqrstuvwxyz'
```
And another, offset 12 through 14. Python does not include the end offset in the slice.

The start offset is inclusive, and the end offset is exclusive:

```
>>> letters[12:15]
'mno'
```
**70 | Chapter 5: Text Strings**


The three last characters:

```
>>> letters[-3:]
'xyz'
```
In this next example, we go from offset 18 to the fourth before the end; notice the

difference from the previous example, in which starting at –3 gets the x, but ending at

–3 actually stops at –4, the w:

```
>>> letters[18:-3]
'stuvw'
```
In the following, we extract from 6 before the end to 3 before the end:

```
>>> letters[-6:-2]
'uvwx'
```
If you want a step size other than 1, specify it after a second colon, as shown in the

next series of examples.

From the start to the end, in steps of 7 characters:

```
>>> letters[::7]
'ahov'
```
From offset 4 to 19, by 3:

```
>>> letters[4:20:3]
'ehknqt'
```
From offset 19 to the end, by 4:

```
>>> letters[19::4]
'tx'
```
From the start to offset 20 by 5:

```
>>> letters[:21:5]
'afkpu'
```
(Again, the end needs to be one more than the actual offset.)

And that’s not all! Given a negative step size, this handy Python slicer can also step

backward. This starts at the end and ends at the start, skipping nothing:

```
>>> letters[-1::-1]
'zyxwvutsrqponmlkjihgfedcba'
```
It turns out that you can get the same result by using this:

```
>>> letters[::-1]
'zyxwvutsrqponmlkjihgfedcba'
```
Slices are more forgiving of bad offsets than are single-index lookups with []. A slice

offset earlier than the beginning of a string is treated as 0 , and one after the end is

treated as -1, as is demonstrated in this next series of examples.

```
Get a Substring with a Slice | 71
```

From 50 before the end to the end:

```
>>> letters[-50:]
'abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz'
```
From 51 before the end to 50 before the end:

```
>>> letters[-51:-50]
''
```
From the start to 69 after the start:

```
>>> letters[:70]
'abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz'
```
From 70 after the start to 70 after the start:

```
>>> letters[70:71]
''
```
### Get Length with len()

So far, we’ve used special punctuation characters such as + to manipulate strings. But

there are only so many of these. Now let’s begin to use some of Python’s built-in func‐

tions: named pieces of code that perform certain operations.

The len() function counts characters in a string:

```
>>> len(letters)
26
>>> empty = ""
>>> len(empty)
0
```
You can use len() with other sequence types, too, as you’ll see in Chapter 7.

### Split with split()

Unlike len(), some functions are specific to strings. To use a string function, type the

name of the string, a dot, the name of the function, and any arguments that the func‐

tion needs: _string_. _function_ ( _arguments_ ). There’s a longer discussion of functions in

Chapter 9.

You can use the built-in string split() function to break a string into a list of smaller

strings based on some separator. We look at lists in Chapter 7. A list is a sequence of

values, separated by commas and surrounded by square brackets:

```
>>> tasks = 'get gloves,get mask,give cat vitamins,call ambulance'
>>> tasks.split(',')
['get gloves', 'get mask', 'give cat vitamins', 'call ambulance']
```
**72 | Chapter 5: Text Strings**


In the preceding example, the string was called tasks and the string function was

called split(), with the single separator argument ','. If you don’t specify a separa‐

tor, split() uses any sequence of white space characters—newlines, spaces, and tabs:

```
>>> tasks.split()
['get', 'gloves,get', 'mask,give', 'cat', 'vitamins,call', 'ambulance']
```
You still need the parentheses when calling split with no arguments—that’s how

Python knows you’re calling a function.

### Combine by Using join()

Not too surprisingly, the join() function is the opposite of split(): it collapses a list

of strings into a single string. It looks a bit backward because you specify the string

that glues everything together first, and then the list of strings to glue:

_string_ .join( _list_ ). So, to join the list lines with separating newlines, you would

say '\n'.join(lines). In the following example, let’s join some names in a list with a

comma and a space:

```
>>> crypto_list = ['Yeti', 'Bigfoot', 'Loch Ness Monster']
>>> crypto_string = ', '.join(crypto_list)
>>> print ('Found and signing book deals:', crypto_string)
Found and signing book deals: Yeti, Bigfoot, Loch Ness Monster
```
### Substitute by Using replace()

You use replace() for simple substring substitution. Give it the old substring, the

new one, and how many instances of the old substring to replace. It returns the

changed string but does not modify the original string. If you omit this final count

argument, it replaces all instances. In this example, only one string ('duck') is

matched and replaced in the returned string:

```
>>> setup = "a duck goes into a bar..."
>>> setup.replace('duck', 'marmoset')
'a marmoset goes into a bar...'
>>> setup
'a duck goes into a bar...'
```
Change up to 100 of them:

```
>>> setup.replace('a ', 'a famous ', 100)
'a famous duck goes into a famous bar...'
```
When you know the exact substring(s) you want to change, replace() is a good

choice. But watch out. In the second example, if we had substituted for the single

character string 'a' rather than the two character string 'a ' (a followed by a space),

we would have also changed a in the middle of other words:

```
Combine by Using join() | 73
```

```
>>> setup.replace('a', 'a famous', 100)
'a famous duck goes into a famous ba famousr...'
```
Sometimes, you want to ensure that the substring is a whole word, or the beginning

of a word, and so on. In those cases, you need regular expressions, which are described

in numbing detail in Chapter 12.

### Strip with strip()

It’s very common to strip leading or trailing “padding” characters from a string, espe‐

cially spaces. The strip() functions shown here assume that you want to get rid of

whitespace characters (' ', '\t', '\n') if you don’t give them an argument. strip()

strips both ends, lstrip() only from the left, and rstrip() only from the right. Let’s

say the string variable world contains the string "earth" floating in spaces:

```
>>> world = " earth "
>>> world.strip()
'earth'
>>> world.strip(' ')
'earth'
>>> world.lstrip()
'earth '
>>> world.rstrip()
' earth'
```
If the character were not there, nothing happens:

```
>>> world.strip('!')
' earth '
```
Besides no argument (meaning whitespace characters) or a single character, you can

also tell strip() to remove any character in a multicharacter string:

```
>>> blurt = "What the...!!?"
>>> blurt.strip('.?!')
'What the'
```
Appendix E shows some definitions of character groups that are useful with strip():

```
>>> import string
>>> string.whitespace
' \t\n\r\x0b\x0c'
>>> string.punctuation
'!"#$%&\'()*+,-./:;<=>?@[\\]^_`{|}~'
>>> blurt = "What the...!!?"
>>> blurt.strip(string.punctuation)
'What the'
>>> prospector = "What in tarnation ...??!!"
>>> prospector.strip(string.whitespace + string.punctuation)
'What in tarnation'
```
**74 | Chapter 5: Text Strings**


### Search and Select

Python has a large set of string functions. Let’s explore how the most common of

them work. Our test subject is the following string containing the text of the immor‐

tal poem “What Is Liquid?” by Margaret Cavendish, Duchess of Newcastle:

```
>>> poem = '''All that doth flow we cannot liquid name
... Or else would fire and water be the same;
... But that is liquid which is moist and wet
... Fire that property can never get.
... Then 'tis not cold that doth the fire put out
... But 'tis the wet that makes it die, no doubt.'''
```
Inspiring!

To begin, get the first 13 characters (offsets 0 to 12):

```
>>> poem[:13]
'All that doth'
```
How many characters are in this poem? (Spaces and newlines are included in the

count.)

```
>>> len(poem)
250
```
Does it start with the letters All?

```
>>> poem.startswith('All')
True
```
Does it end with That's all, folks!?

```
>>> poem.endswith('That \' s all, folks!')
False
```
Python has two methods (find() and index()) for finding the offset of a substring,

and has two versions of each (starting from the beginning or the end). They work the

same if the substring is found. If it isn’t, find() returns -1, and index() raises an

exception.

Let’s find the offset of the first occurrence of the word the in the poem:

```
>>> word = 'the'
>>> poem.find(word)
73
>>> poem.index(word)
73
```
And the offset of the last the:

```
>>> word = 'the'
>>> poem.rfind(word)
214
```
```
Search and Select | 75
```

```
>>> poem.rindex(word)
214
```
But if the substring isn’t in there:

```
>>> word = "duck"
>>> poem.find(word)
-1
>>> poem.rfind(word)
-1
>>> poem.index(word)
Traceback (most recent call last):
File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
ValueError: substring not found
>>> poem.rfind(word)
-1
>>> poem.rindex(word)
Traceback (most recent call last):
File "<stdin>", line 1, in <module>
ValueError: substring not found
```
How many times does the three-letter sequence the occur?

```
>>> word = 'the'
>>> poem.count(word)
3
```
Are all of the characters in the poem either letters or numbers?

```
>>> poem.isalnum()
False
```
Nope, there were some punctuation characters.

### Case

In this section, we look at some more uses of the built-in string functions. Our test

string is again the following:

```
>>> setup = 'a duck goes into a bar...'
```
Remove. sequences from both ends:

```
>>> setup.strip('.')
'a duck goes into a bar'
```
```
Because strings are immutable, none of these examples actually
changes the setup string. Each example just takes the value of
setup, does something to it, and returns the result as a new string.
```
Capitalize the first word:

**76 | Chapter 5: Text Strings**


```
>>> setup.capitalize()
'A duck goes into a bar...'
```
Capitalize all the words:

```
>>> setup.title()
'A Duck Goes Into A Bar...'
```
Convert all characters to uppercase:

```
>>> setup.upper()
'A DUCK GOES INTO A BAR...'
```
Convert all characters to lowercase:

```
>>> setup.lower()
'a duck goes into a bar...'
```
Swap uppercase and lowercase:

```
>>> setup.swapcase()
'A DUCK GOES INTO A BAR...'
```
### Alignment

Now, let’s work with some layout alignment functions. The string is aligned within

the specified total number of spaces ( 30 here).

Center the string within 30 spaces:

```
>>> setup.center(30)
' a duck goes into a bar... '
```
Left justify:

```
>>> setup.ljust(30)
'a duck goes into a bar... '
```
Right justify:

```
>>> setup.rjust(30)
' a duck goes into a bar...'
```
Next, we look at more ways to align a string.

### Formatting

You’ve seen that you can concatenate strings by using +. Let’s look at how to interpo‐

late data values into strings using various formats. You can use this to produce

reports, forms, and other outputs where appearances need to be just so.

Besides the functions in the previous section, Python has three ways of formatting

strings:

```
Alignment | 77
```

- old style (supported in Python 2 and 3)
- new style (Python 2.6 and up)
- f-strings (Python 3.6 and up)

#### Old style: %

The old style of string formatting has the form _format_string_ % _data_. Inside the for‐

mat string are interpolation sequences. Table 5-1 illustrates that the very simplest

sequence is a % followed by a letter indicating the data type to be formatted.

Table 5-1. Conversion types

```
%s string
%d decimal integer
%x hex integer
%o octal integer
%f decimal float
%e exponential float
%g decimal or exponential float
%% a literal %
```
You can use a %s for any data type, and Python will format it as a string with no extra

spaces.

Following are some simple examples. First, an integer:

```
>>> '%s' % 42
'42'
>>> '%d' % 42
'42'
>>> '%x' % 42
'2a'
>>> '%o' % 42
'52'
```
A float:

```
>>> '%s' % 7.03
'7.03'
>>> '%f' % 7.03
'7.030000'
>>> '%e' % 7.03
'7.030000e+00'
>>> '%g' % 7.03
'7.03'
```


An integer and a literal %:

```
>>> '%d%%' % 100
'100%'
```
Let’s try some string and integer interpolation:

```
>>> actor = 'Richard Gere'
>>> cat = 'Chester'
>>> weight = 28
```
```
>>> "My wife's favorite actor is %s" % actor
"My wife's favorite actor is Richard Gere"
```
```
>>> "Our cat %s weighs %s pounds" % (cat, weight)
'Our cat Chester weighs 28 pounds'
```
That %s inside the string means to interpolate a string. The number of % appearances

in the string needs to match the number of data items after the % that follows the

string. A single data item such as actor goes right after that final %. Multiple data

must be grouped into a tuple (details in Chapter 7; it’s bounded by parentheses, sepa‐

rated by commas) such as (cat, weight).

Even though weight is an integer, the %s inside the string converted it to a string.

You can add other values in the format string between the % and the type specifier to

designate minimum and maximum widths, alignment, and character filling. This is a

little language in its own right, and more limited than the one in the next two sec‐

tions. Let’s take a quick look at these values:

- An initial '%' character.
- An optional alignment character: nothing or '+' means right-align, and '-'
    means left-align.
- An optional minwidth field width to use.
- An optional '.' character to separate minwidth and maxchars.
- An optional maxchars (if conversion type is s) saying how many characters to
    print from the data value. If the conversion type is f, this specifies precision (how
    many digits to print after the decimal point).
- The conversion type character from the earlier table.

This is confusing, so here are some examples for a string:

```
>>> thing = 'woodchuck'
>>> '%s' % thing
'woodchuck'
>>> '%12s' % thing
' woodchuck'
>>> '%+12s' % thing
```
```
Formatting | 79
```

```
' woodchuck'
>>> '%-12s' % thing
'woodchuck '
>>> '%.3s' % thing
'woo'
>>> '%12.3s' % thing
' woo'
>>> '%-12.3s' % thing
'woo '
```
Once more with feeling, and a float with %f variants:

```
>>> thing = 98.6
>>> '%f' % thing
'98.600000'
>>> '%12f' % thing
' 98.600000'
>>> '%+12f' % thing
' +98.600000'
>>> '%-12f' % thing
'98.600000 '
>>> '%.3f' % thing
'98.600'
>>> '%12.3f' % thing
' 98.600'
>>> '%-12.3f' % thing
'98.600 '
```
And an integer with %d:

```
>>> thing = 9876
>>> '%d' % thing
'9876'
>>> '%12d' % thing
' 9876'
>>> '%+12d' % thing
' +9876'
>>> '%-12d' % thing
'9876 '
>>> '%.3d' % thing
'9876'
>>> '%12.3d' % thing
' 9876'
>>> '%-12.3d' % thing
'9876 '
```
For an integer, the %+12d just forces the sign to be printed, and the format strings

with .3 in them have no effect as they do for a float.

#### New style: {} and format()

Old style formatting is still supported. In Python 2, which will freeze at version 2.7, it

will be supported forever. For Python 3, use the “new style” formatting described in

**80 | Chapter 5: Text Strings**


this section. If you have Python 3.6 or newer, f-strings (“Newest Style: f-strings” on

page 82) are even better.

“New style” formatting has the form _format_string_ .format( _data_ ).

The format string is not exactly the same as the one in the previous section. The sim‐

plest usage is demonstrated here:

```
>>> thing = 'woodchuck'
>>> '{}'.format(thing)
'woodchuck'
```
The arguments to the format() function need to be in the order as the {} placehold‐

ers in the format string:

```
>>> thing = 'woodchuck'
>>> place = 'lake'
>>> 'The {} is in the {}.'.format(thing, place)
'The woodchuck is in the lake.'
```
With new-style formatting, you can also specify the arguments by position like this:

```
>>> 'The {1} is in the {0}.'.format(place, thing)
'The woodchuck is in the lake.'
```
The value 0 referred to the first argument, place, and 1 referred to thing.

The arguments to format() can also be named arguments

```
>>> 'The {thing} is in the {place}'.format(thing='duck', place='bathtub')
'The duck is in the bathtub'
```
or a dictionary:

```
>>> d = {'thing': 'duck', 'place': 'bathtub'}
```
```
Formatting | 81
```

In the following example, {0} is the first argument to format() (the dictionary d):

```
>>> 'The {0[thing]} is in the {0[place]}.'.format(d)
'The duck is in the bathtub.'
```
These examples all printed their arguments with default formats. New-style format‐

ting has a slightly different format string definition from the old-style one (examples

follow):

- An initial colon (':').
- An optional fill character (default ' ') to pad the value string if it’s shorter than
    minwidth.
- An optional alignment character. This time, left alignment is the default. '<' also
    means left, '>' means right, and '^' means center.
- An optional sign for numbers. Nothing means only prepend a minus sign ('-')
    for negative numbers. ' ' means prepend a minus sign for negative numbers,
    and a space (' ') for positive ones.
- An optional minwidth. An optional period ('.') to separate minwidth and max‐
    chars.
- An optional maxchars.
- The conversion type.

```
>>> thing = 'wraith'
>>> place = 'window'
>>> 'The {} is at the {}'.format(thing, place)
'The wraith is at the window'
>>> 'The {:10s} is at the {:10s}'.format(thing, place)
'The wraith is at the window '
>>> 'The {:<10s} is at the {:<10s}'.format(thing, place)
'The wraith is at the window '
>>> 'The {:^10s} is at the {:^10s}'.format(thing, place)
'The wraith is at the window '
>>> 'The {:>10s} is at the {:>10s}'.format(thing, place)
'The wraith is at the window'
>>> 'The {:!^10s} is at the {:!^10s}'.format(thing, place)
'The !!wraith!! is at the !!window!!'
```
#### Newest Style: f-strings

f-strings appeared in Python 3.6, and are now the recommended way of formatting

strings.

To make an f-string:

- Type the letter f or F directly before the initial quote.

**82 | Chapter 5: Text Strings**


- Include variable names or expressions within curly brackets ({}) to get their val‐
    ues into the string.

It’s like the previous section’s “new-style” formatting, but without the format() func‐

tion, and without empty brackets ({}) or positional ones ({1}) in the format string.

```
>>> thing = 'wereduck'
>>> place = 'werepond'
>>> f'The {thing} is in the {place}'
'The wereduck is in the werepond'
```
As I already mentioned, expressions are also allowed inside the curly brackets:

```
>>> f'The {thing.capitalize()} is in the {place.rjust(20)}'
'The Wereduck is in the werepond'
```
This means that the things that you could do inside format() in the previous section,

you can now do inside a {} in your main string. This seems easier to read.

f-strings use the same formatting language (width, padding, alignment) as new-style

formatting, after a ':'.

```
>>> f'The {thing:>20} is in the {place:.^20}'
'The wereduck is in the ......werepond......'
```
Starting in Python 3.8, f-strings gain a new shortcut that’s helpful when you want to

print variable names as well as their values. This is handy when debugging. The trick

is to have a single = after the name in the {}-enclosed part of the f-string:

```
>>> f'{thing =}, {place =}'
thing = 'wereduck', place = 'werepond'
```
The name can actually be an expression, and it will be printed literally:

```
>>> f'{thing[-4:] =}, {place.title() =}'
thing[-4:] = 'duck', place.title() = 'Werepond'
```
Finally, the = can be followed by a : and the formatting arguments like width and

alignment:

```
>>> f'{thing = :>4.4}'
thing = 'were'
```
### More String Things

Python has many more string functions than I’ve shown here. Some will turn up in

later chapters (especially Chapter 12), but you can find all the details at the standard

documentation link.

```
More String Things | 83
```

### Coming Up

You’ll find Froot Loops at the grocery store, but Python loops are at the first counter

in the next chapter.

### Things to Do

5.1 Capitalize the word starting with m:

```
>>> song = """When an eel grabs your arm,
... And it causes great harm,
... That's - a moray!"""
```
5.2 Print each list question with its correctly matching answer, in the form:

Q: question

A: answer

```
>>> questions = [
... "We don't serve strings around here. Are you a string?",
... "What is said on Father's Day in the forest?",
... "What makes the sound 'Sis! Boom! Bah!'?"
... ]
>>> answers = [
... "An exploding sheep.",
... "No, I'm a frayed knot.",
... "'Pop!' goes the weasel."
... ]
```
5.3 Write the following poem by using old-style formatting. Substitute the strings

'roast beef', 'ham', 'head', and 'clam' into this string:

```
My kitty cat likes %s,
My kitty cat likes %s,
My kitty cat fell on his %s
And now thinks he's a %s.
```
5.4 Write a form letter by using new-style formatting. Save the following string as

letter (you’ll use it in the next exercise):

```
Dear {salutation} {name},
```
```
Thank you for your letter. We are sorry that our {product}
{verbed} in your {room}. Please note that it should never
be used in a {room}, especially near any {animals}.
```
```
Send us your receipt and {amount} for shipping and handling.
We will send you another {product} that, in our tests,
is {percent}% less likely to have {verbed}.
```
```
Thank you for your support.
```
**84 | Chapter 5: Text Strings**


```
Sincerely,
{spokesman}
{job_title}
```
5.5 Assign values to variable strings named 'salutation', 'name', 'product',

'verbed' (past tense verb), 'room', 'animals', 'percent', 'spokesman', and

'job_title'. Print letter with these values, using letter.format().

5.6 After public polls to name things, a pattern emerged: an English submarine

(Boaty McBoatface), an Australian racehorse (Horsey McHorseface), and a Swedish

train (Trainy McTrainface). Use % formatting to print the winning name at the state

fair for a prize duck, gourd, and spitz.

5.7 Do the same, with format() formatting.

5.8 Once more, with feeling, and f strings.

# 요약 정리

## 문자열 바꾸기
replace('바꿀문자열', '새문자열')은 문자열 안의 문자열을 다른 문자열로 바꿉니다(문자열 자체는 변경하지 않으며 바뀐 결과를 반환합니다). 
```python
result = 'Hello, world!'.replace('world', 'Python')
print(result) # 'Hello, Python!'
```
## 문자 바꾸기
str.maketrans('바꿀문자', '새문자')로 변환 테이블을 만듭니다. 그다음에 translate(테이블)을 사용하면 문자를 바꾼 뒤 결과를 반환합니다. 다음은 문자열 'apple'에서 a를 1, e를 2, i를 3, o를 4, u를 5로 바꿉니다.
```python
table = str.maketrans('aeiou', '12345')
result = 'apple'.translate(table)
print(result) # '1ppl2'
```
## 문자열 분리하기
split()은 공백을 기준으로 문자열을 분리하여 리스트로 만듭니다. 
split('기준문자열')과 같이 기준 문자열을 지정하면 기준 문자열로 문자열을 분리합니다.
```python
result = 'apple pear grape pineapple orange'.split()
print(result) #['apple', 'pear', 'grape', 'pineapple', 'orange']
result = 'apple, pear, grape, pineapple, orange'.split(', ')
print(result) #['apple', 'pear', 'grape', 'pineapple', 'orange']
```

# 구분자 문자열과 문자열 리스트 연결하기
join(리스트)는 구분자 문자열과 문자열 리스트의 요소를 연결하여 문자열로 만듭니다. 
```python
result = ' '.join(['apple', 'pear', 'grape', 'pineapple', 'orange'])
print(result) # 'apple pear grape pineapple orange'
```

## 소문자 <-> 대문자로 바꾸기
upper()는 문자열의 문자를 모두 대문자로 바꿉니다. 
lower()는 문자열의 문자를 모두 소문자로 바꿉니다.
```python
result = 'python'.upper()
print(result) # 'PYTHON'
```
## 공백 삭제하기 / 특정 문자 삭제하기
lstrip, rstrip, strip 메서드를 사용합니다.
```python
>>> '   Python   '.lstrip()
'Python   '
>>> '   Python   '.rstrip()
'   Python'
>>> '   Python   '.strip()
'Python'
```

lstrip('삭제할문자들')과 같이 삭제할 문자들을 문자열 형태로 넣어주면 문자열 왼쪽에 있는 해당 문자를 삭제합니다. 다음은 문자열 왼쪽의 ,(콤마)와 .(점)을 삭제합니다. 단, 여기서는 공백을 넣지 않았으므로 공백은 그대로 둡니다.
```python
>>> ', python.'.lstrip(',.')
' python.'
```
참고 | 구두점을 간단하게 삭제하기
string 모듈의 punctuation에는 모든 구두점이 들어있습니다. 다음과 같이 strip 메서드에 string.punctuation을 넣으면 문자열 양쪽의 모든 구두점을 간단하게 삭제할 수 있습니다.
```python
>>> import string
>>> ', python.'.strip(string.punctuation)
' python'
>>> string.punctuation
'!"#$%&\'()*+,-./:;<=>?@[\\]^_`{|}~'
만약 공백까지 삭제하고 싶다면 string.punctuation에 공백 ' '을 연결해서 넣어주면 되겠죠?
>>> ', python.'.strip(string.punctuation + ' ')
'python'

```

## 문자열을 왼쪽 정렬하기
ljust(길이), rjust(길이),center(길이)는 문자열을 지정된 길이로 만든 뒤 지정 정렬하며 남는 공간을 공백으로 채웁니다
```python
>>> 'python'.ljust(10)
'python    '
>>> 'python'.rjust(10)
'    python'
>>> 'python'.center(10)
'  python  '
```
## 메서드 체이닝
메서드 체이닝은 메서드를 줄줄이 연결한다고 해서 메서드 체이닝(method chaining)이라 부릅니다.
```python
>>> 'python'.rjust(10).upper()
'    PYTHON'
```
## 문자열 왼쪽에 0 채우기
zfill(길이)는 지정된 길이에 맞춰서 문자열의 왼쪽에 0을 채웁니다( zero fill을 의미). 단, 문자열의 길이보다 지정된 길이가 작다면 아무것도 채우지 않습니다. 보통 zfill은 숫자를 일정 자릿수로 맞추고 앞자리는 0으로 채울 때 사용합니다.
```python
>>> '35'.zfill(4)        # 숫자 앞에 0을 채움
'0035'
>>> '3.5'.zfill(6)       # 숫자 앞에 0을 채움
'0003.5'
>>> 'hello'.zfill(10)    # 문자열 앞에 0을 채울 수도 있음
'00000hello'
```
## 문자열 위치 찾기
find('찾을문자열')은 문자열에서 특정 문자열을 찾아서 인덱스를 반환하고, 문자열이 없으면 -1을 반환합니다. find는 왼쪽에서부터 문자열을 찾는데, 같은 문자열이 여러 개일 경우 처음 찾은 문자열의 인덱스를 반환합니다. 
rfind('찾을문자열')은 오른쪽에서부터 특정 문자열을 찾아서 인덱스를 반환하고, 문자열이 없으면 -1을 반환합니다
find, rfind 이외에도 index, rindex로 문자열의 위치를 찾을 수 있습니다.단, 문자열이 없으면 에러를 발생시킵니다. index도 같은 문자열이 여러 개일 경우 처음 찾은 문자열의 인덱스를 반환합니다.
```python
>>> 'apple pineapple'.find('pl')
2
>>> 'apple pineapple'.find('xy')
-1
>>> 'apple pineapple'.rfind('pl')
12
>>> 'apple pineapple'.rfind('xy')
-1
>>> 'apple pineapple'.index('pl')
2
>>> 'apple pineapple'.rindex('pl')
12
```

## 문자열 개수 세기
count('문자열')은 현재 문자열에서 특정 문자열이 몇 번 나오는지 알아냅니다. 
```python
>>> 'apple pineapple'.count('pl')
```

## 서식지정자

```python
>>> name = 'maria'
>>> 'I am %s.' % name
'I am maria.'

>>> 'I am %d years old.' % 20
'I am 20 years old.'

>>> '%f' % 2.3
'2.300000'
>>> '%.2f' % 2.3
'2.30'

>>> '%10s' % 'python'
'    python'

>>> 'Today is %d %s.' % (3, 'April')
'Today is 3 April.'

>>> 'Hello, {0}'.format('world!')
'Hello, world!'
>>> 'Hello, {0}'.format(100)
'Hello, 100'

>>> 'Hello, {0} {2} {1}'.format('Python', 'Script', 3.6)
'Hello, Python 3.6 Script'

>>> 'Hello, {} {} {}'.format('Python', 'Script', 3.6)
'Hello, Python Script 3.6'

>>> 'Hello, {language} {version}'.format(language='Python', version=3.6)
'Hello, Python 3.6'

>>> language = 'Python'
>>> version = 3.6
>>> f'Hello, {language} {version}'
'Hello, Python 3.6' 
```

[참고] 중괄호 출력하기
{% raw %}중괄호 자체를 출력할 때는 {{, }}처럼 중괄호를 두 번 사용하면 됩니다.{% endraw %}
```python
{% raw %}>>> '{{ {0} }}'.format('Python'){% endraw %}
'{ Python }'

>>> '{0:<10}'.format('python')
'python    '

>>> '%03d' % 1
'001'
>>> '{0:03d}'.format(35)
'035'

>>> '%08.2f' % 3.6
'00003.60'
>>> '{0:08.2f}'.format(150.37)
'00150.37'

>>> '{0:0<10}'.format(15)    # 길이 10, 왼쪽으로 정렬하고 남는 공간은 0으로 채움
'1500000000'
>>> '{0:0>10}'.format(15)    # 길이 10, 오른쪽으로 정렬하고 남는 공간은 0으로 채움
'0000000015'

>>> '{0:0>10.2f}'.format(15)    # 길이 10, 오른쪽으로 정렬하고 소수점 자릿수는 2자리
'0000015.00'

>>> '{0: >10}'.format(15)    # 남는 공간을 공백으로 채움
'        15'
>>> '{0:>10}'.format(15)     # 채우기 부분을 생략하면 공백이 들어감
'        15'
>>> '{0:x>10}'.format(15)    # 남는 공간을 문자 x로 채움
'xxxxxxxx15'
```

[참고] 금액(number) -> 천단위로 콤마 넣기 문자
먼저 format 내장 함수를 사용하는 방법입니다. 다음과 같이 format 함수에 숫자와 ','를 넣어줍니다.
```python
>>> format(1493500, ',')
'1,493,500'
>>> '%20s' % format(1493500, ',')    # 길이 20, 오른쪽으로 정렬
'           1,493,500'
>>> '{0:,}'.format(1493500)
'1,493,500'

>>> '{0:>20,}'.format(1493500)     # 길이 20, 오른쪽으로 정렬
'           1,493,500'
>>> '{0:0>20,}'.format(1493500)    # 길이 20, 오른쪽으로 정렬하고 남는 공간은 0으로 채움
'000000000001,493,500'
```